ACT PERSPECTIVES ON THE NEW COMPETITION TOOL 
AUGUST 6 2020 

ACT PERSPECTIVES ON THE NEW COMPETITION TOOL  

PAGE | 1 

OBJECTIVE 

The ACT welcomes a holistic approach to competition policy that serves Europe’s fundamental goals in matters of 
cultural  diversity and media pluralism. By delivering a level playing  field,  competition  rules can be a real game 
changer to ensure Europe’s creative media ecosystems – part of Europe’s priority CCI ecosystem – remain vibrant 
drivers of Europe’s employment and GDP. We welcome the reflection on much needed ex-ante rules aimed at 
larger online platforms as well as the update of the Market Definition notice as the necessary first steps in the 
strategic re-thinking of the competition framework. The anticompetitive practices of large online platforms acting 
as gatekeepers hampers the ability of broadcasters as pure content players to compete on equal terms. Over the 
years, the  Commission  and  some  NCAs  have  undertaken  several  enforcement initiatives against  these  players. 
However,  in  many  cases  these  have  proved  insufficient  to  restore  effective  competition  or  to  prevent  further 
anticompetitive conducts. The platforms’ dual role as distributors/publishers of content and their dominance in 
multiple activities across online market value chains generates disproportionate market power in markets in which 
they operate and potentially in new markets they seek to enter.  

For broadcasters, at the heart of Europe’s audiovisual production and distribution sectors, there is an opportunity 
to address a number of concerns and ensure competition policy is fit for the challenges posed by new technologies 
in order to drive Europe’s media strategy and support a robust, responsible and reliable media landscape. 

OPPORTUNITIES 

The existing toolbox of competition tools has proven to be insufficient: either too slow or too complex or simply 
ineffective at providing  adequate remedies.  The  ACT welcomes the Consultation  on the New  Competition Tool 
which  complements  the  other  proposed  pillars  in  the  Commission’s  approach  to  deliver  a  pro-competitive 
landscape.  

The  New  Competition  Tool  would  ideally  ensure  an  agile  framework  to  resolve  structural  issues  that  radically 
change market dynamics at present determined by a handful of global tech operators with unprecedented market 
power.  A  modern  and  agile  competition  policy,  based  on  structural  remedies  which  could  address  specific 
behaviors, even though dominance in the specific market is not yet evident, would also be in line with the French 
Senate’s information report published in July 20201.   

We  consider  the  proposed  New  Competition  Tool  as  an  element  complementary  to  the  current  competition 
toolbox based on Art. 101 and 102 of the Treaty. We suggest that the scope be limited to online platforms acting 
as gatekeepers on digital markets characterised by their capacity to build extremes economies of scale and scope, 
strong network effects, zero pricing and data dependency. The approach should be focused on digital firms with 
an intensive valuable data accumulation capacity and an extreme market size, identified either by looking at market 
capitalisation or by looking at customer base and ability to lock in those customers e.g. when moving into a new 
sector. In the identification of the relevant players, it is also important to identify a wide set of strategic digital 
services (e.g. social media, search, online marketplaces) that are essential to achieve data dominance which allows 
for market tipping.  Ultimately, those systemic platforms should be defined in strict consistency with the definition 
which will be used for the application of ex ante rules in the Digital Services Act. 

CHALLENGES 

The articulation of the rules and instruments foreseen will be key. The immediate challenge will be to ensure the 
envisaged tool finds a clean fit in the existing and foreseen competition policies.  

As such, the goal of the NCT should be to help address gaps in Articles 101 and 102 TFEU without displacing their 

1 http://www.senat.fr/rap/r19-603/r19-6031.pdf 

Association of Commercial Television in Europe | Rue des Deux Églises 26 | 1000 Brussels | Belgium | T: +32 (0)2 736 00 52 | W: www.acte.be European 
Economic Interest Grouping | Register of Legal Entities (Brussels): 0438.023.393 | Transparency Register Number: 18574111503-28 

 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
ACT PERSPECTIVES ON THE NEW COMPETITION TOOL 
AUGUST 6 2020 

PAGE | 2 

enforcement.  It  should  be  aimed  at  cases  in  which  a  market  distortion  is  not  specifically  related  to  a  conduct 
undertaken by an already dominant firm - which may be more appropriately addressed through an investigation 
under Article 102. The criteria outlining the likelihood of a market tipping need to be robust so as to be consistently 
applied. 

The new tool will also need to be very clear on remedies, while allowing proper rights of defense and evidence 
standards. This will ensure the Tool to be properly fit for the specific purpose it is aimed at tackling and applies to 
services and avoids targeting companies that may be able to bring more competition to the markets in question. 
As such, the substantive tests to be put in place will also require more clarification with clear guidelines. 

Finally, beside the need for a legislative intervention, it is worth noticing that competition authorities in their daily 
practice should better consider competitive distortions within the framework of the current competition law by 
adapting  their practice to better reflect new market realities and the  huge  power of  global  digital players  (e.g. 
adapt the definition of relevant markets, review and widen the criterion of “consumer welfare” so as not to only 
limit this to pricing considerations, etc.). 

CONCLUDING REMARKS 

While  we  are  in  favour  of  the  holistic  approach  proposed  of  the  EC  and  recognise  the  potential  benefits  of  a 
potential NCT in very specific cases, broadcasters would advise that the tool, its application and basis, be clarified 
on several levels. This tool will need to be extremely well scoped to ensure it tackles the emerging challenges of 
the platform economy. 

We support the general objectives of a New Competition Tool – consisting in ensuring a strong enforcement of 
existing rules and tackling structural competition problems – and look forward to better understanding its scope 
and aims.  

The  introduction  of  much  needed  ex-ante  rules  aimed  at  large  online  platforms  acting  as  gatekeeper  and  the 
update of the Market Definition Notice are also needed to reshape the competitive environment.Therefore, we 
welcome a New Competition Tool which, as outlined by Executive Vice-President Vestager in her statement to the 
US Congress prior the Hearing of tech CEOs on 29 July 2020, “would complement both existing case enforcement 
under Articles 101 and 102 of the EU Treaty, as well as the possible ex ante regulation that would apply to digital 
gatekeeper platforms”. 

ABOUT THE ASSOCIATION OF COMMERCIAL TELEVISION IN EUROPE (ACT) 

The European commercial broadcasting sector is a major success story. We entertain and inform hundreds of millions of EU citizens each day via thousands 
of channels available across Europe. The Association of Commercial Television in Europe represents the interests of 29 leading commercial broadcasters 
across  Europe.  The  ACT  member  companies  finance,  produce,  promote  and  distribute  content  and  services  benefiting  millions  of  Europeans  across  all 
platforms.  At ACT we believe that the healthy and sustainable  commercial broadcasting sector has an  important role to play  in the European  economy, 
society and culture.  

Further enquiries to be directed to Grégoire Polad | ACT Director General  

T: +32 2 736 00 52 | E: gp@acte.be  

Association of Commercial Television in Europe | Rue des Deux Églises 26 | 1000 Brussels | Belgium | T: +32 (0)2 736 00 52 | W: www.acte.be European 
Economic Interest Grouping | Register of Legal Entities (Brussels): 0438.023.393 | Transparency Register Number: 18574111503-28 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
