Ref. Ares(2020)4483524 - 29/08/2020

A  NEW  CROSS-SECTOR  COMPETITION  TOOL  AND  SECTOR  SPECIFIC 
REGULATIONS ARE NECESSARY TO DEAL WITH ONLINE AND OFFLINE 
COMPETITIVE BOTTLENECKS 

This  note  jointly  addresses  the  questions  posed  by  the  European  Commission  in  its 
consultation  on  the  New  Competition  Tool  (“NCT”)  and  the  Gatekeeper  Online 
Platforms (“GOP”)1. 

1	 THE ECONOMIC THEORY OF COMPETITIVE BOTTLENECKS: FROM MARK 
1	
ARMSTRONG TO DG COMP AND OEDC	

2	 REGULATION OF COMPETITIVE BOTTLENECKS IS AN OLD PHENOMENON 
6	
IN THE EU	

3	 COMPETITIVE  BOTTLENECKS  OFTEN  ESCAPE  COMPETITION  RULES’ 
7	
DOMINANCE TEST	

4	 SUPERMARKETS  AND  AMAZON:  BOTTLENECKS  COMPETING  IN  THE 
8	
SAME SECTOR	

5	 CONCLUSIONS	

19	

1  The economic theory of competitive bottlenecks: from Mark Armstrong to DG 

COMP and OECD 

Mark Armstrong developed the model of “competitive bottlenecks” in his seminal paper 
on two-sided platforms (i.e., operators serving two groups of users - group-1 and group-
2).  In  the  competitive  bottleneck  model,  whereas  group-1  agents  join  all  platforms 
(“multi-home”), group-2 agents only join one platform (“single-home”). Multi-homing 
agents can only reach single-homing agents through a given platform, which therefore 
becomes  a  competitive  bottleneck  and  can  overcharge/exploit  multi-homing  agents 
whilst  passing  on  the  benefit  to  a  greater  or  lesser  extent  to  the  single-homing 
customers2. 

“Supermarket 

Serving  Consumers 

or  Harming  Competition”, 

1  
The  author  regularly  advises  suppliers  active  in  the  FMCG  sector  and  their  associations. 
However, the opinions expressed in this contribution are the author’s own and do not reflect the views of 
his  clients.  This  contribution  draws  inspiration  from  previous  works  and  presentations  to  public 
authorities  on  this  topic,  most  notably,  “Supermarket  Power”,  OECD  Food  Chain  Analysis  Network, 
2014, 
Power: 
2013; 
https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2401723; 
Competitive 
Bottlenecks:  Competition  and  Regulatory  Issues”,  UNCTAD  Intergovernmental  Group  of  Experts  on 
Competition  Law  and  Policy,  Fifteenth  Session,  2016;  “Supermarket  Platforms”,  Presentation  to  the 
Expert Sub-Group on private labels of the European Commission’s High Level Forum on Food Supply 
Chain, 23.11.2017. 
2

Mark Armstrong, “Competition in two-sided markets”, The RAND Journal of Economics, 37(3), 
2006, (the first version of the article was distributed as early as 2002), pp. 669-670: “Here, if it wishes to 
interact  with  an  agent  on  the  single-homing  side,  the  multi-homing  side  has  no  choice  but  to  deal  with 
that  agent’s  chosen  platform.  Thus,  platforms  have  monopoly  power  over  providing  access  to  their 
single-homing customers for the multi-homing side. This monopoly power naturally leads to high prices 
being charged to the multi-homing side, and there will be too few agents on this side being served from a 
social  point  of  view  (Proposition  4).  By  contrast,  platforms  do  have  to  compete  for  the  single-homing 

“Supermarkets 

and 

1	

	
 
																																																								
  
Armstrong  identified  the  mobile  telephony  market  as  a  competitive  bottleneck,  where 
competition  to  attract  subscribers  (via  subscription  and  outbound  call  fees)  coexisted 
with  lack  of  competition  in  the  termination  of  calls  from  subscribers  of  a  competitor 
(via  termination  fees)3.  Furthermore,  he  identified  other  competitive  bottlenecks4  and 
developed two stylized models for advertising on media platforms and supermarkets. In 
the supermarket model, whereas the prices paid to suppliers were always too low, the 
prices  charged  to  shoppers  depended  on  the  retail  market  power  enjoyed  by  the 
supermarket, and the overall effect was socially undesirable (i.e., the harm to suppliers 
exceeded any benefit that shoppers could gain)5.   

DG COMP relied on the competitive bottleneck theory in the assessment of the merger 
between  two  Global  Distribution  Systems  (GDS)6  and  it  was  discussed  in  an  article 
published  by  an  official  of  the  DG  COMP’s  Chief  Economist  Team  in  the 
Commission’s  Competition  Policy  Newsletter7.  The  article  admitted  that  competition 

agents,  and  high  profits  generated  from  the  multi-homing  side  are  to  a  large  extent  passed  on  to  the 
single-homing side in the form of low prices (or even zero prices).” 
3  
Armstrong 2006, p. 678: “The tariffs that mobile networks set in equilibrium have low charges 
for  subscription  and  outbound  calls  and  high  charges  for  call  termination.  In  particular,  the  models 
predict  that  high  profits  made  from  call  termination  are  passed  on  to  subscribers  in  the  form  of 
subsidized  handsets  or  similar  inducements.  More  precisely,  the  equilibrium  call-termination  charge  is 
chosen to maximize the welfare of mobile subscribers and mobile networks combined, and the interests of 
those who call mobile networks are ignored. This feature—that the single-homing side is treated well and 
the multi-homing side’s interests are ignored in equilibrium—is a characteristic of the models presented 
below. A competitive bottleneck is present: even if the market for subscribers is highly competitive so that 
mobile  networks  have  low  equilibrium  profits  overall,  there  is  no  competition  for  providing 
communication services to these subscribers.”	
4  
Id.,  p.  678:  “Other  examples  of  this  competitive  bottleneck  framework  include:  most  people 
might read a single newspaper (perhaps due to time constraints), but advertisers might place ads in all 
relevant  newspapers;  consumers  might  choose  to  visit  a  single  shopping  mall  (perhaps  because  of 
transport costs), but the same retailer might choose to open a branch in several malls; consumers might 
visit  a  single  supermarket,  but  suppliers  might  wish  to  place  their  products  on  the  shelves  of  several 
supermarkets; or a travel agent might use just one computerized airline reservation system, while airlines 
are forced to deal with all such platforms in order to gain access to each travel agent’s customers.”	
5  
Id., p. 685: “As with all the competitive bottleneck models, in equilibrium the joint surplus of the 
platforms and the single-homing group is maximized (supermarkets and consumers in this case, as given 
in expression (36)), and the interests of the multi-homing side (the suppliers) are ignored. The low level 
of  compensation  in  (36)  will  exclude  some  relatively  high-cost  suppliers  whose  presence  in  the 
supermarkets is nevertheless efficient. (A supplier should supply if α2 < α1 − c, whereas the equilibrium 
price  p2  in  expression  (36)  is  strictly  lower  than α1  −  c  and  supply  is  inefficiently  restricted.)  In  other 
words, payments to suppliers are too low from a social point of view and there are too few products on 
the shelves. How well consumers are treated depends on competitive conditions on their side.” 
6  
Commission  Decision  of  21.08.2007,  Case  COMP/M.4523-Travelport/Worldspan.  This 
transaction was cleared after a ‘Phase II’ investigation. Both merging parties provide travel distribution 
services,  in  particular  through  their  respective  ‘Global  Distribution  Systems’  (GDS)  Worldspan  and 
Galileo  (Travelport’s  brand).  These  technical  platforms  match  travel  content  provided  by  airlines,  hotel 
chains, car rental services, etc. on one side, and the demand for such content as conveyed by travel agents 
on  the  other  side.  The  Commission  considered  that  the  two-sided  GDS  market  contains  a  number  of 
elements  characteristic  of  the  competitive  bottleneck  model:    (1)  The  multi-homing  (travel  content 
providers)  /  single-homing  (travel  agents)  configuration;  (2)  a  limited  degree  of  product  differentiation; 
(3)  asymmetries  in  indirect  network  effects,  with  indirect  network  externalities  generated  mainly  if  not 
exclusively  on  the  travel  agent  side;  and  (4)  a  distribution  of  prices  skewed  towards  the  travel  content 
side. 
7  
Stefano  Vannini,  “Bargaining  and  two-sided  markets:  the  case  of  Global  Distribution  Systems 
(GDS)  in  Travelport´s  acquisition  Worldspan”,  EU  Competition  Policy  Newsletter,  2-2008.  The  author 
clarifies  that  the  content  of  the  article  does  not  necessarily  reflect  the  official  position  of  the  European 
Commission. 	

2	

	
																																																								
analysis  should  take  into  account  two-sidedness  if  indirect  network  externalities  are 
significant,  otherwise,  a  one-side  analysis  of  each  side  of  the  platform  may  be 
sufficient8.  

The article elaborated on the concept of “indirect network effects” and listed a few two-
sided markets, among which supermarkets9. Then, it addressed subscription patterns and 
incentives10  and  focused  on  competitive  bottlenecks11.  Finally,  the  article  implied  that 
competition  law  should  intervene  to  correct  the  competition  problems  caused  by 
competitive bottlenecks unless the multi-homing side enjoyed sufficient countervailing 
power12.  This  was  the  case  in  the  Travelport/Worldspan  merger,  where  the 
countervailing power of multi-homing travel content providers vis-à-vis GDS platforms 
led the Commission to conclude that the merger would not restrict competition despite 
the single-homing pattern of travel agents dealing with GDS platforms13. Interestingly, 

8  
Id.,	 p.  43:  “As  emphasised  in  a  series  of  recent  articles,  the  two-  (or  multi-)sided  nature  of  a 
market  should  explicitly  be  considered  in  evaluating  the  existence  and  magnitude  of  possible  anti-
competitive  effects.  However,  the  relevance  of  the  two-sided  nature  of  markets  depends  on  at  least  two 
elements:  (i)  indirect  network  externalities  and  (ii)  pattern  of  subscription  (‘homing’)  to  the  platform. 
Under  specific  circumstances,  in  particular  when  indirect  network  effects  are  negligible,  the  standard 
‘one-sided’ analysis of each side of the platform in isolation provides a simpler analytical framework and 
a reliable proxy.”	
9  
Id., p. 43: “Indirect network externalities (or cross-group externalities) arise when the value of a 
platform  for  users  on  one  side  is  affected  by  the  size  of  the  users’  network  on  the  other  side.  The 
willingness of customers on one side of the platform to pay in order to subscribe to a specific platform’s 
provider then depends on the size of the network of users covered by that same provider on the other side 
of the platform. For example, (i) the number of readers of a newspaper or magazine (or the audience of a 
TV  broadcast)  tends  to  attract  advertisers,  (ii)  the  number  of  customers  of  a  supermarket  chain  (or 
shopping  mall)  tends  to  attract  suppliers  of  products  to  be  sold  there,  (iii)  the  number  of  holders  of  a 
given credit card increases the incentive for shops to accept the card.” 
10  
Id.,  p.  43:  “As  a  general  rule,  multi-homing  on  one  side  of  the  market  (say  A)  decreases 
incentives  for  multi-homing  on  the  other  side  (say  B).  Assuming  for  a  moment  that  users  of  group  A 
choose full multi-homing, they are accessible by users of group B no matter what platform provider these 
users  adopt.  The  marginal  value,  in  terms  of  network  externalities,  for  B  users  of  subscribing  to  an 
additional provider is then limited or non-existent. Therefore, the incentive to multi-home on side B of the 
platform  is  correspondingly  limited  or  non-existent.  Reversing  this  reasoning,  if  single-homing  is 
prevalent  among  B  users,  this  represents  an  incentive  for  A  users  to  multi-home,  because  network 
externalities would be positive and significant.” 
11  
Id., pp. 43-44: “In other words, multi-homing prevailing on one side of the platform and single-
homing on the other corresponds to a situation where indirect network effects are asymmetric and mostly 
arise  on  the  single-homing  side.  This  is  the  situation  identified  in  economic  literature  as  ‘competitive 
bottlenecks’, which, in its most stylised version, boils down to full multi-homing on one side and single-
homing  with  no  exceptions  on  the  other.  In  this  case,  as  soon  as  platform  providers  man-  age  to  get 
enough of both sides on board, they will be able to ‘tip’ the market in a way to allow them to extract rents 
from multi-homing A users. In this way, a platform provider can subsidise single-homing B users willing 
to join its platform, for whom providers have to compete fiercely. Single-homing on side B supports rent 
extraction on side A because providers appear to A users as gate-keepers to a number of B users.” 
12  
Id.,  p.  44:  “Last  but  not  least,  customers  on  the  multi-homing  side  A,  for  whom  the  platform’s 
provider  represents  a  gatekeeper  to  single-homing  customers  on  side  B,  may  have  some  countervailing 
bargaining  power.  For  instance,  they  can  divert  some  of  their  traffic  and  circumvent  the  platform, 
thereby decreasing the total rent available for extraction by the platform provider. While remaining able 
to extract the same rent in relative terms, as compared to the total rent available, the platform provider 
will still see its rent decrease in absolute terms because of the diversion. Faced with this possibility, the 
platform  provider  may  well  decide  to  make  concessions  to  multi-homing  customers  in  order  to  limit 
diversion (and the related erosion of the total rent available for extraction)”.  
13  
Id.,  p.  50:  “In  situations  where  a  ‘competitive  bottleneck’  is  identified,  it  has  to  be  considered 
whether  platform  users  have  any  countervailing  bargaining  power.  If  that  is  the  case,  the  theoretical 
result of the ‘competitive bottleneck’ theory, stating that the platform provider can extract all rents to the 

3	

	
																																																								
the  merger  decision  did  not  make  a  single  reference  to  the  regulatory  framework  that 
prevented GDS abuses (Regulation 2299/89, replaced by Regulation 80/2009). 

It  is  worth  noting  that  DG  COMP  linked  the  following  elements  to  competitive 
bottlenecks:  

“(79) The two-sided GDS market contains a number of elements which are characteristic of multi-
homing  /single  homing  situations  as  described  in  economic  literature.  These  elements  are  (i)  a 
limited degree of product differentiation, (ii) asymmetries in network effects (network externalities 
are generated mainly on the TA [Travel Agent] side and GDS providers have to create demand on 
that  side  in  order  to  have  demand  on  the  TSP  [Transport  Service  Provider]  side)  and  (iii)  a 
distribution  of  prices  and  revenues  skewed  towards  one  side  of  the  platform  (GDS  providers 
obtain profit only on the TSP side of the market and partially use this profit to offset net losses on 
the TA side).”14 

The OECD Roundtable on-two sided markets provided the European Commission and 
other  competition  authorities,  a  fresh  opportunity  to  develop  their  standpoint  on  two-
sided  markets.  In  its  contribution,  the  European  Commission  downplayed  its  practical 
experience  in  this  field15  and  focused  again  on  competitive  bottlenecks.  It  argued  that 
platforms would exploit their “monopoly power” over the multi-homing side16 provided 

detriment of multi-homing users, has to be adjusted. Travelport’s acquisition of Worldspan provides an 
interesting example in this regard, as it features (i) preliminary indications of possible unilateral effects 
on the basis of high market shares in a number of markets, (ii) a pattern of subscription to the platform 
broadly  corresponding  to  the  competitive  bottleneck  scenario  and  (iii)  a  dynamic  aspect  consisting  of 
users on the multi-homing side developing bargaining tools to counteract the rent extraction predicted by 
theory in that scenario.” 
14  
Commission Decision of 21/08/2007, Case No COMP/M.4523- Travelport/Worldspan.  
15  
OECD 2009b, Note by the European Commission, pars. 9-11. See, in particular, par. 9: “At the 
outset, it is necessary to point out that the EU Commission, possibly like other competition authorities, 
has  not  yet  acquired  any  significant  experience  on  the  assessment  of  competition  cases  involving  two-
sided platforms. As a result this OECD Roundtable contribution, unlike past contributions in other topics, 
does not provide a summary of the EU Commission's case practice regarding the competitive assessment 
of two-sided platforms. (…)”. See also par. 10: “Thus it is still early for a competition authority to adopt 
any definite views, let alone concrete policies or assessment methodologies, concerning the application of 
competition policy in cases involving two-sided platforms. Hence, the views and comments put forward in 
this paper are intended to add to the on-going debate and cannot be read as providing guidance on the 
EU Commission's past or future assessment of competition cases involving two-sided platforms”. One is 
bound to disagree with the Commission on this point. Competition authorities have dealt for a long time 
with two-sided markets and competitive bottlenecks even if under conventional one-sided methodologies. 	
16  
Id., Note by the European Commission, par. 33: “As explained by Rysman (2007) the presence of 
multi-homing on one side of competing platforms influences the degree of competition. Whether agents at 
both  sides  of  a  platform  participate  in  multiple  platforms  or  just  one  has  important  implications  for 
market  power.  If  one  side  of  a  market  practices  single-homing,  then  the  only  way  for  the  other  side  to 
reach  those  agents  is  through  their  preferred  platform.  Thus,  platforms  have  monopoly  power  over 
providing  access  to  their  single-homing  customers  for  the  multi-homing  side.  This  monopoly  power 
naturally leads to high prices being charged to the multi-homing side and typically there will be too few 
agents on this side being served from a social welfare point of view.” Theoretically, the exploitation of 
the  multi-homing  side  occurs  whether  the  multi-homing/single-homing  outcome  is  assumed  (see 
Armstrong 2006) or endogenously created (Note by the Delegation of the European Commission, par. 40: 
“In  particular,  Gabszewicz  and  Wauthy  (2004)  assume  agents  are  heterogeneous  and  allow  for  an 
endogenous  participation  in  each  side  of  the  market  (i.e.  registering  to  no  platform  is  allowed,  and  is 
observed in equilibrium). However only registration fees are allowed in this model implying that it is best 
viewed  as  representing  a  situation  where  the  agents  in  one  side  of  the  market  have  access  to  a  set  of 
transactions whose size is endogenously determined by the number of affiliated agents in the other side. 
In  this  model,  one  side  multi-homes,  whereas  the  other  one  single-homes.  This  equilibrium  has  similar 
features  as  identified  by  Armstrong  (2004)  with  the  multi-homing  side  being  “exploited”  and  the  other 
being targeted “aggressively”. A key-difference is that Armstrong assumes the homing structure (single-

4	

	
																																																								
three conditions are met17, and dealt with its practical implications from a competition 
law  perspective18.  Finally,  the  note  relied  again  on  Mark  Armstrong’s  model  to  argue 
that  even  in  a  highly  competitive  inter-platform  market,  the  bottleneck  single-
home/multi-home model may lead to socially inefficient outcomes (exclusion of multi-
homing agents) and, therefore, some sort of regulation may be pertinent19.  

To sum up, the common features of competitive bottlenecks are the following:  

They facilitate interactions between distinct groups of users that value each other 

- 
(indirect network externalities, sometimes negative, e.g.,  advertising). 

- 
Price structure matters: the most valuable user group (end-consumer) is treated 
favourably  to  promote  a  single-homing  trend  (exclusivity)  whilst  the  multi-homing 
business user group is exploited/mistreated. 

- 
The  pricing  structure  may  lead  to  socially  inefficient  exploitation/exclusion  on 
the side of the multi-homing user group whilst end-users (consumers) are being offered 
attractive prices at least under a short-term static analysis. 

- 
Platform  competition  may  produce  a  counterintuitive  effect:  it  may  increase 
platforms’  upward  vertical  integration  incentives,  the  exploitation/exclusion  of  the 
business user group and the socially inefficient outcome. 

Competitive bottlenecks normally fall outside the competition law radar except 
- 
when  dominance  can  be  established  following  a  restrictive  approach  to  market 
definition  (e.g.,  Amazon  and  e-commerce,  Google  and  general  searches,  Apple  and 
Apple store). 

homing  on  one  side,  multi-homing  in  the  other)  whereas  in  Gabszewicz  and  Wauthy  (2004)  the  unique 
equilibrium outcome emerges endogenously.” 
17  
Id.,  Note  by  the  European  Commission,  par.  35:  “Vannini  (2008)  recalls  that  this  extreme 
homing configuration (and related rent distribution pattern) is based on a series of assumptions: (i) that 
there is no differentiation among different platform providers, (ii) that customer preferences on the same 
side of the platform are sufficiently homogeneous and (iii) that customers on the multi-homing side have 
no  bargaining  power  allowing  them  to  limit  rent  extraction  by  the  platform  provider.  Under  these 
assumptions  theoretical  models  such  as  Armstrong’s  (2006)  predict  intense  competition  between 
platforms  on  the  single-homing  side  of  the  market  and  almost  non-existent  competition  on  the  multi-
homing  side”.  Indeed,  the  first  two  conditions  relate  to  the  multihoming/singlehoming  configuration, 
therefore  only  the  third  one  (countervailing  power  on  the  multihoming  side)  is  relevant  once  the 
multihoming/singlehoming configuration has been ascertained.”  
18  
two-sided platforms) and 4 (Significance of two-sided platforms in selected merger cases). 
19  
Id.,  Note  by  the  European  Commission,  pars.  57:  “Armstrong  points  out  that  even  if  the 
platforms do not make excessive profits overall, the multi- homing side faces too high a charge from the 
point  of  view  of  social  welfare.  Bolt  and  Tieman  (2006)  in  a  comparatively  simple  two-sided  platform 
model,  obtain  a  similar  result.  They  show  that  in  the  social  optimum,  platform  pricing  leads  to  an 
inherent cost recovery problem… It follows that even adequate competition policy enforcement alone may 
not always lead to best outcomes. This suggests, at least in some instances regulation may be pertinent.” 

Id., Note by the European Commission, Sections 3 (Assessment of competition cases involving 

5	

	
 
 
 
																																																								
2  Regulation of competitive bottlenecks is an old phenomenon in the EU  

Economists have long argued that customer lock-in (single-homing) and switching costs 
facilitate inefficient pricing structures and exploitation of business agents in a growing 
number of markets20.  

Indeed, several two-sided markets have been subject to extensive regulatory remedies. 
A  representative  list  of  sectors  includes  the  following:  (1)  Computer  Reservation 
Systems  (CRSs),  now  known  as  Global  Distribution  Systems  (GDSs);  (2)  Mobile 
Communications  Networks  (mobile  call  termination  and  mobile  virtual  network 
operators); (3) Internet Service Providers (Net Neutrality); (4) Internet Search Engines; 
(5) Internet Domain Name Registration (separation of registry and registrar operations); 
(6)  Media  Platforms  (fair  treatment  of  advertisers);  (7)  Card  Payment  Networks 
(Regulation  2015/751,  fair  dealing  of  merchants,  separation  of  scheme  and 
infrastructure  and  non-discrimination  obligation),  (8)  Fintech  (Directive  2015/2366, 
FRAND  access  of  payment  service  providers  to  payment  systems  and  credit 
institutions),  (9)  financial  indexes  (Regulation  2016/1011  on  conflict  of  interest  rules 
and FRAND access to critical financial benchmarks and Directive 2014/65 on FRAND 
access, co-location and fees regarding markets in financial instruments)21.  

20  
Armstrong  and  Wright,  “Mobile  Call  Termination”,  Working  Paper,  September  2007,  p.  1: 
“There is an important, and perhaps growing, set of markets in which monopoly prices emerge even when 
competition is intense. That is to say, while industry profit is not excessive overall, there is an inefficient 
balance  of  prices:  too  high  for  some  services,  too  low  for  others.  Familiar  examples  involve  consumer 
“lock-in” of various kinds, including markets with switching costs. In these markets the typical pattern of 
prices  involves  “bargains-then-ripoffs”,  so  that  firms  attract  new  consumers  with  generous  deals  up-
front,  consumers  pay  high  (perhaps  monopoly)  prices  once  locked  in.  If  competition  is  vigorous,  the 
monopoly  profits  from  locked-in  consumers  are  transferred  to  new  consumers,  and  the  lifetime 
profitability of a consumer is approximately zero. In a sense, a new consumer’s “future self” is exploited 
by  the  “present  self”.  A  related,  but  distinct,  set  of  markets  exhibit  what  might  be  termed  “competitive 
bottlenecks”.  Here,  firms  compete  to  attract  one  group  of  consumers.  For  natural  technological  or 
geographical reasons, each consumer in this group wishes to deal with just one firm. A second group of 
consumers  wishes  to  interact  with  the  first  group  and,  because  each  consumer  in  the  first  group  deals 
exclusively with one firm, that firm can charge the second group high prices (or pay low input prices) for 
access  to  its  captive  customers.  If  competition  is  vigorous,  the  monopoly  profits  generated  by  the  first 
group are passed back to these consumers in the form of subsidised service. Here, the first group may be 
said to exploit the second group. Examples of this kind of market include: newspaper advertising (where 
most  readers  tend  to  read  a  single  newspaper  due  to  time  constraints,  and  so  a  newspaper  can  charge 
high fees to advertisers for access to its captive readers) and supermarkets (where a consumer tends to 
visit just one shop over the relevant time horizon, and so the supermarket can pay low wholesale prices to 
its  suppliers  for  access  to  these  captive  shoppers).  At  the  end  of  the  paper  we  will  discuss  another 
possible  application  of  this  approach,  to  the  contentious  issue  of  “net  neutrality”  on  the  internet. 
However,  perhaps  the  leading  example  of  a  competitive  bottleneck  involves  call  termination  on  mobile 
telephone  networks.  Despite  the  distinction  made  between  competitive  bottlenecks  and  aftermarket,  the 
evidence in competitive bottlenecks shows, at least in the retail grocery market, that the exploitation of a 
set  of  customers  ultimately  leads  to  the  exploitation  of  the  other  set  of  customers,  as  both  groups  are 
interrelated.” 	
21  
See, a for a comprehensive analysis of the competitive bottleneck features of these sectors and 
the  adopted  regulatory  remedies,  Javier  Berasategi,  “Supermarket  Power:  Serving  Consumers  or 
Harming Competition”,  2014, Section 5.3.2.1 - The theory and practice on competitive bottlenecks and 
Annex  8.2  –  Markets  with  competitive  bottlenecks,  and  “Supermarket  Platforms”,  Presentation  to  the 
Expert Sub-Group on private labels of the European Commission’s High Level Forum on Food Supply 
Chain, 23.11.2017.    

6	

	
 
																																																								
The  CRS  sector,  perhaps  the  first  competitive  bottleneck  regulated  under  EU  law, 
reflects  the  EU’s  success  in  efficiently  regulating  competitive  bottlenecks  without 
undermining the competitiveness of the EU economy: 

“The Code of Conduct for Computerised Reservation Systems ("the Code of Conduct") was first 
established  in  1989  with  the  adoption  of  Regulation  2299/89.  At  that  time,  the  vast  majority  of 
airline bookings were made through CRSs and most CRSs were owned and controlled by airlines. 
It  was  felt  that,  in  order  to  deal  with  the  competition  concerns  and  consumer  protection  issues 
arising in the supply chain of air transport products, an ad hoc regulatory framework was needed, 
instead of solely relying on the generally applicable provisions of competition law. 

The Code of Conduct recognised that computerised reservation systems required a certain degree 
of regulation in order to ensure that all airlines enjoy the same level of access to travel agents and 
consumers.  Similarly,  travel  agents  and  consumers  needed  to  be  protected  against  competitive 
abuse  or  other  harmful  market  practices  (e.g.  display  bias).  The  Code  was  established  with  the 
aim  of  improving  transparency  and  preventing  discriminatory  behaviour  both  by  the  system 
vendors  themselves  and  also  by  airlines,  especially  parent  carriers  of  CRSs.  On  the  one  hand, 
system  vendors  were  required  to  deal  in  an  even-handed  manner  with  all  carriers  and  travel 
agents, while, on the other, parent carriers of a CRS were required not to favour that system over 
the  others.  The  Code  also  imposed  obligations  in  terms  of  neutral  display  in  order  to  avoid 
discriminatory treatment of airlines on the system's displays.  

(…) 

The  present  proposal  for  a  revision  of  the  Code  of  Conduct  does  not  entail  per  se  a  social 
dimension.  Indeed,  the  Code  of  Conduct  aims,  in  parallel  and  without  prejudice  to  competition 
law,  at  market  efficiency  within  the  distribution  chain  for  air  transport  products.  It  is  meant  to 
ensure  that  no  undertaking  in  the  chain  is  capable  of  capturing  excess  profits  in  the  long  run 
and/or of distorting competition to its own advantage and to the detriment of consumers.”22 

Nowadays, two of the three leading worldwide GDS are EU-based. This evidences that 
the  regulatory  intervention  in  the  EU  has  not  undermined  the  emergence  of  leading 
CRS/GDS in the EU. 

3  Competitive bottlenecks often escape competition rules’ dominance test 

The  different  regulatory  instruments  dealing  with  competitive  bottlenecks  have 
expressly or impliedly admitted that competition law is unable/insufficient to deal with 
them. The gap lies with the conventional definition of (single) dominance under article 
102 TFUE, which rarely applies to markets where competitive bottlenecks operate. As 
far as article 101 TFUE is concerned, competitive bottlenecks’ practices (can) display a 
unilateral nature that rarely falls under the required concept of agreement or concerted 
practice.  

Again,  it  is  worth  referring  to  the  Commission’s  recent  views  on  the  regulation  of 
CRS/GDS: 

“Article 3 of the CRS Code of Conduct providing, among others, that CRSs shall not attach unfair 
and/or unjustified conditions to any contract with a participating carrier and shall not prevent the 
participating  carrier  from  using  another  system  may  be  considered  going  beyond  Article  102 
TFEU. Thus unlike Article 102 TFEU this provision applies regardless of whether the CRS holds a 

22  
COMMISSION STAFF WORKING DOCUMENT - Proposal for a regulation of the European 
Parliament and of the Council on a Code of Conduct for computerised reservation systems, SEC(2007) 
1496, 15 November 2007 

7	

	
	
																																																								
dominant  position  or  not.  But  this  does  not  constitute  an  inconsistency  with  competition  policy, 
since  it  is  not  uncommon  that  when  necessary  for  achieving  identified  public  policy  objectives, 
regulatory  measures  may  go  beyond  what  could  be  considered  justified  under  competition 
rules.”23 

The Regulation 2015/751 on interchange fees for card-based payment transactions went 
as far as to admit that “(t)he application of existing legislation by the Commission and 
national competition authorities has not been able to redress this situation”. 

Indeed,  markets  where  competitive  bottlenecks  operate  tend  to  be  concentrated  (a 
handful of leading players) and exhibit a high degree of transparency and parallelism on 
the end-consumer side but single dominant positions rarely emerge because none of the 
leading  competitive  bottlenecks  is  deemed  to  be  in  a  position  to  behave  to  an 
appreciable extent independently of its fellow-competitors. Indeed, even if one of them 
could exceptionally be qualified as a dominant operator, it is questionable whether some 
of  its  commercial  practices  would  fall  under  the  category  of  abuse.  For  example,  the 
abusive character of self-preferencing is being challenged in the Google case (T-612/17 
-  Google  and  Alphabet  v  Commission)  and  the  European  Commission  has  for  a  long 
time  held  the  view  that  an  analogous  practice  in  the  CRS/GDS  field  is  a  contentious 
issue under competition rules:  

“Given  these  circumstances,  the  2007  impact  assessment  concluded  that  the  risk  of  abuse  of 
market  power  was  higher  than  in  other  economic  sectors  and  sole  reliance  on  the  general 
competition  rules  was  not  considered  sufficient  at  that  time.  In  addition,  some  practices  e.g. 
display bias were considered to be harmful to consumers but would not necessarily be captured 
by competition law.”24 

Finally, several legal scholars have exposed the limitations of competition rules to deal 
with  supermarkets’  competitive  bottleneck  role  and  this  issue  is  discussed  in  the  next 
section. 

4  Supermarkets and Amazon: bottlenecks competing in the same sector 

The  dual  role  conflict  of  online  platforms  and  the  self-preferencing  of  their  own 
offerings  are  at  the  core  of  the  Commission’s  antitrust  investigation  against  Amazon 
(AT.40462 - Amazon Marketplace) and the regulatory initiative on online gatekeepers.  

As  far  back  as  in  1989,  the  EU  imposed  FRAND  remedies  on  CRS  in  order  to  pre-
emptively  address  similar  concerns  in  that  sector.  As  explained  above,  several  other 
sectors  have  also  been  regulated  in  order  to  deal  with  dual  role  conflicts  and  prevent 
self-preferencing and discrimination in broad terms.  

However, opponents of the regulation of online gatekeepers have rightly pointed to one 
specific off-line sector where the leading players exhibit the same dual role conflict and 
openly favour their own brands over independent third-party brands in terms of access 
to and competition within their stores: supermarkets.  

23  
COMMISSION STAFF WORKING DOCUMENT – EVALUATION of the Regulation 80/2009 
of the European Parliament and the Council of 14 January 2009 on a Code of Conduct for computerised 
reservation systems, SWD(2020) 9 final, 23.1.2020 
24  

Idem. 

8	

	
 
																																																								
This  seemingly  inconsistent/contradictory  approach  to  supermarkets  vis-à-vis  online 
platforms has led the European Commission’s Expert Group for the Observatory on the 
Online  Platform  Economy  to  try  to  differentiate  the  competitive  role  of  supermarkets 
and online platforms:  

“In conclusion, although it is clear that differentiated treatment is not an isolated phenomenon of 
the online platform economy, the effects of differentiation on online platforms differ considerably 
from the context of supermarkets due to differences in business models, scale and issues relating 
to the use of data and algorithms for personalisation that are specific to the online environment. 
As a result, the fact that differentiated treatment has so far not led to competition concerns in the 
context of supermarkets does not mean that equivalent practices should be tolerated in the online 
platform economy.”25 

However,  the  theoretical  reasoning  that  leads  the  Expert  Group  to  this  conclusion  is 
flawed and evidences a lack of understanding of the real-life operation of supermarkets 
and the competitive impact of their practices26.  

First, the Expert Group overplays the scale of online platforms, their capacity to extend 
it and unlimited shelf-space. This point says nothing about the market power of online 
platforms and supermarkets. Amazon’s worldwide turnover is smaller than WalMart’s 
turnover  and  its  turnover  in  the  EU  is  significantly  smaller  than  that  of  the  main 
supermarket chains operating in the EU. Amazon’s strengths have not so far allowed it 

Platform 

Economy, 

10.07.2020, 

25  
Progress Report - Work stream on Differentiated treatment, Expert Group for the Observatory on 
the 
https://ec.europa.eu/digital-single-
Online 
market/en/news/commission-expert-group-publishes-progress-reports-online-platform-economy, pp. 8-9. 
26  
This  lack  of  understanding  of  the  supermarket  sector  features  even  more  prominently  in  the 
OECD  Secretariat’s  background  note  to  the  OECD  conference  on  “Line  of  business  restrictions  as  a 
solution  to  competition  concerns”,  8.06.2020,  https://www.oecd.org/daf/competition/line-of-business-
restrictions-as-a-solution-to-competition-concerns.htm.  The  background  note  introduces  the  debate  by 
arguing that non-discrimination obligations are rarely required by pointing t the supermarkets’ practices 
(“6.  Firstly,  it  should  be  said  that  LOBRs  are  rarely  required.  For  example,  they  are  unlikely  to  be 
necessary  even  if  a  vertically  integrated  firm  favours  or  ‘self-preferences’  its  own  products,  as  when 
supermarkets promote or favour the sale of their own-brand products. The market power of the brands 
that these own-brand products compete with, combined with the lack of market power on the part of many 
supermarket chains, mean that these are unlikely to give rise to competition concerns.”) but then suggests 
that  the  UK’s  Grocery  Supply  Code  of  Practice,  a  regulatory  regime  covering  almost  all  UK 
supermarkets’ in their dealings with their  suppliers, may inspire a similar regime on the likes of Amazon 
(“86. In such cases, it is possible that even if Amazon were more efficient, and not interested in squeezing 
its  downstream  rivals’  margins  it  might  nevertheless  create  competitive  distortions  that  hold-up 
investment  by  suppliers  (see  OECD,  2016b).  While  these  concerns  might  not  support  an  exclusionary 
abuse case, or a structural separation, it might nevertheless suggest that non-discrimination LOBRs, such 
as the codes of practice applied to dominant supermarkets, could have pro-competitive effects (see Box 
5)”.  Box  5  of  the  background  note  describes  the  GSCOP,  p.  22:  “Box  5.  Groceries  Supplies  Code  of 
Practice (GSCOP)39 
Following  a  market  investigation  the  CMA’s  predecessor,  the  Competition  Commission,  found  that 
supermarkets  with  market  power  had  exploited  suppliers  by  engaging  in  conduct  which  damaged  their 
investment  incentives.  For  example,  demanding  retrospective  rebates,  delaying  payment,  and  applying 
uncontracted  deductions.  In  effect,  these  were  examples  of  ‘hold-up’  problems  that  smaller  suppliers 
were unable to resolve themselves due to the oligopsonistic market power of the supermarkets. 
This led the Competition Commission to recommend that government create a Groceries Supply Code of 
Practice, which would restrict the ability of supermarkets to exploit suppliers. The code of practice was 
to  be  enforced  by  an  independent  adjudicator  who  could  receive  anonymised  evidence  (due  to  fear  of 
reprisals by dominant supermarkets. The proposal was accepted by the government and the adjudicator 
was  appointed  in  2013.  Actions  have  included  investigations  against  Tesco  for  delayed  payments,  and 
limits  on  the  use  of  forensic  auditing.  The  adjudicator  reports  that  the  proportion  of  suppliers 
experiencing code-related issues has decreased from 79% in 2014 to 41% in 2019.” 

9	

	
																																																								
to  play  any  meaningful  role  in  the  grocery  retail  markets  where  it  operates  and  it  has 
considered it necessary to establish an offline grocery distribution business to improve 
its market presence.  

Second,  the  Expert  Group  points  to  the  difference  between  the  online  platforms’ 
intermediary nature (i.e., “intermediate direct transactions between business users and 
consumers”) and supermarkets’ one-sided reseller nature (i.e., “it locates part of the risk 
and the ability to set prices with the supermarket (depending on the circumstances, such 
as when the supermarket can return unsold items to the supplier)”). This differentiation 
is  artificial  and  useless  from  a  competition  standpoint.  Indeed,  Amazon  is  both  a 
marketplace  and  a  retailer  and  supermarkets  such  as  WalMart  and  Carrefour  have 
started  to  operate  marketplaces  alongside  their  retailing  operations.  More  importantly, 
as a US academic has rightly pointed out, the intermediation/retailing function is just a 
pure accounting issue: 

“5. The only difference between a platform and a retailer is inventory risk 

Sussman thinks there is another key difference in Amazon relative to other retailers: 

Amazon is a *retailer*, a *platform*, and a *producer*. I have no problem with them using the 
data they have as a *retailer* to develop products — just like Walmart. I do have a problem with 
Amazon using information they gather as a *platform/ad biz.* 

First, it’s important to know that ad fees on Amazon are analogous to slotting fees in brick and 
mortar  stores.  Brands  have  been  paying  for  promotion  in  retail  long  before  the  e-commerce 
revolution.  Prime  shelf  space  and  prime  search  rankings  are  both  scarce  resources  that  are 
auctioned  off  to  the  highest  bidder.  According  to  data  from  the  Center  for  Science  in  the  Public 
Interest,  food  manufacturers  spend  70%  of  their  marketing  budgets  on  these  “trade  promotion 
fees” and 30% on advertising. At the end of the day, it’s all marketing. 

Second, while it’s true that Amazon is simultaneously a retailer, producer, and platform, this is not 
economically different from traditional retailing. I’ve already explained how legacy retailers also 
engage in private label and are therefore “producers.” And while they are not “platforms” in the 
technical  sense  of  being  open  to  anyone  (sounds…  anticompetitive),  the  business  model  is  not 
significantly different. 

Traditional  retail  charges  a  markup  on  the  price  paid  to  wholesalers  or  manufacturers  (a 
percentage of the final retail price). The retailer can either purchase that inventory outright and 
assume the risk of it not selling, or it can include a “sale or return” provision, which reserves the 
retailer  the  right  to  return  the  inventory  to  the  wholesaler  or  manufacturer  if  it  does  not  sell. 
Inventory risk is just another cost and can be traded off with other contract provisions during the 
negotiating process. 

Platforms, on the other hand, do not take custody of the inventory and instead provide services to 
sellers.  In  exchange,  the  platform  charges  a  percentage  of  the  final  retail  price.  Whether  it’s  a 
platform or a retailer, the business is the same: Partner with companies selling goods and collect 
a profit margin on the final retail price. The rest is just accounting.”

27

Indeed, the real life operation of supermarkets discredits the Expert Group’s reasoning. 
They  acknowledge 
the 
intermediary/retail distinction. Indeed, modern supermarkets sell an increasing array of 
services to their suppliers and their trading terms with the latter may make it impossible 

items”  policies  may  blur 

that  “return  of  unsold 

Alec 

27  
Label  Goods”, 
https://medium.com/@progressivepolicyinstitute/amazon-antitrust-and-private-label-goods-
bf8b8cc00e99.  

“Amazon,  Antitrust, 

Private 

Stapp, 

and 

27.04.2020, 

10	

	
 
																																																								
	
to  distinguish  both  functions.  For  example,  article  3.2.a)  of  the  Directive  2019/633  of 
the European Parliament and of the Council of 17 April 2019 on unfair trading practices 
in business-to-business relationships in the agricultural and food supply chain authorises 
the return of unsold food items as long as it has been previously agreed. Furthermore, 
article 3.2 of the Directive 2019/633 also allows supermarkets to charge their suppliers 
fees  for  as  many  “services”  as  stocking,  displaying  or  listing  food  products,  or  of 
making  such  products  available  on  the  market  (letter  b));  any  discounts  on  food 
products sold by the supermarket as part of a promotion (letter c)); advertising by the 
supermarket  (letter  d));  marketing  by  supermarket  (letter  e));  fitting-out  of 
supermarkets’  premises  (letter  f)).  Furthermore,  supermarkets  often  require  their 
suppliers  to  guarantee  them  a  retail  margin  through  different  means  (e.g.,  ex-post 
adjustments  to  the  procurement  price,  ad  hoc  service  fees,  unjustified  penalties,  price 
and service fee adjustments in subsequent contracts) or simply impose it unilaterally. 

As far as supermarkets’ control over pricing is concerned, this reinforces their ability to 
self-prefer their products as compared to Amazon’s marketplace business because they 
are  in  a  position  to  control  the  retail  prices  of  their  competitors  and  this  offers  a 
powerful tool to distort in-store competition between brands in favour of store brands28. 

Third,  the  Expert  Group  admits  that  supermarkets’  increased  use  of  consumers’ 
shopping  data  creates  additional  information  asymmetries  between  them  and  their 
suppliers  (“At  the  same  time,  the  increased  use  of  data  on  customer  preferences  and 
behaviour  and  the  integration  of  such  data  into  supermarkets’  business  practices, 
including 
through  personalised  shopping  experiences,  does  create  additional 
information  asymmetries  between  suppliers  and  supermarkets”)  but  argues  that  “it 
seems reasonable to assume that platforms’ datasets on customers are richer by orders 
of magnitude, and therefore allow for personalisation that is much more sophisticated 
(although structured attempts of quantifying or describing have yet to be undertaken)”. 
It  remains  to  be  seen  how  Amazon’s  knowledge  of  a  consumer’s  preferences  on 
technological  devices  (e.g.,  mobile  phones  and  computers)  may  translate  into  a 
personalised offering of FMCG products, but the fact is that supermarkets knowledge of 
online  and  offline  shoppers’  preferences  (be  it  organically  generated  or  procured  by 
external  consultants)  rivals  at  least,  and  most  likely  outperforms  “by  orders  of 
magnitude”  that  of  Amazon.  As  a  consequence,  Amazon’s  market  performance  as  a 
marketplace or retailer of FMCG products shows that the company is for the time being 
only a marginal competitor to the leading supermarkets. 

Fourth, the Expert Group adopts a fall back position when it concedes that even if the 
supermarkets’  self-preferencing  practices  may  be  similar  to  those  of  Amazon,  their 
competitive effects are not:  

28  
See, for a comprehensive assessment of supermarkets’ pricing strategies to self-prefer their own 
brands,  Javier  Berasategi,  Supermarket  Power:  Serving  Consumers  or  Harming  Competition”,  2014, 
5.5.2.1  -  Pricing  practices  (“(…).  Therefore,  vertically  integrated  supermarkets  may  strategically  use 
retail  pricing  in  order  to  favour  their  own  brands.  Olbrich  and  Buhr  have  coined  the  term  “price 
scenery”,  thereby  indicating  that  supermarkets  fix  retail  prices  without  regard  for  the  interests  of 
individual competing brands608. (…). The main strategic pricing weapons in the hands of supermarkets 
in order to foreclose rival independent grocery brands are the following: (1) an artificial price gap with 
the leading independent grocery brand; (2) price-dumping of the independent brand in order to destroy 
its  brand  value;  (3)  pocketing  of  promotional  wholesale  prices;  and  (4)  prohibition  of  on-packaging 
promotions.”) 

11	

	
																																																								
“While similar practices may occur in the context of supermarkets, their effects may not be as far-
reaching  as  on  online  platforms.  For  instance,  if  a  supermarket  identifies  a  trend  among 
consumers  for  a  particular  product  that  is  offered  by  one  of  its  suppliers,  the  supermarket  can 
decide to develop its own-brand product with similar features, in order to extract more value from 
that particular market segment. However, in order to do so, it will need to invest in developing its 
own brand in order to compete with that supplier. Platforms, on the contrary, can decide to start 
selling the exact same product as offered by a business user – and possibly even against a lower 
price,  because  of  their  scale  advantages  –  if  the  manufacturer  is  willing  to  supply  the  product. 
Alternatively, they can decide to start selling very similar products but which have a slightly lower 
price  and/or  some  additional  particular  features  that  may  make  them  more  attractive  to  the 
customers.  This  way,  without  taking  the  same  risk,  the  platform  can  compete  intensely  with 
businesses who took the risk in growing a market for a product whose success among consumers 
was not yet established at the initial launch of the product on the platform.”  

The Expert Group utterly fails in their effort to differentiate supermarkets from online 
platforms. By now, all the supermarkets have developed their own brands and adding a 
new  reference  to  that  brand  is  dead  easy  for  them.  The  market  success  of  the  leading 
supermarkets’  own  brands  has  evidenced  that  their  know  how  and  market  penetration 
outperforms that of Amazon by “orders of magnitude”. The combined market share of 
supermarkets’  brands  have  achieved  high  market  shares  in  all  the  Member  States  and 
they exceed the 50% threshold in many categories:  

Source: https://www.plmainternational.com/industry-news/private-label-today 

Indeed, supermarkets’ retailer model allows them to control the launch of innovations 
and their fate. Whereas online platforms such as Amazon are formally open platforms 
(even  though  their  access  fees  and  unilateral  termination  practices  may  raise  access 
barriers) and innovators may in principle access them without restrictions, supermarkets 
operate  much  more  restrictive  access  and  unilateral  termination  policies.  Under  this 
restrictive  access  regime,  suppliers  must  share  their  innovations  with  supermarkets 
months  ahead  of  their  launch  date  in  order  to  be  considered  for  listing  and  nothing 
prevents the latter from copying these innovations: procurement functions of third-party 
and supermarket brands are fully mingled, no supplier is able to impose legal covenants 
preventing the supermarket from misusing the secret know how of the supplier for the 
benefit of the supermarket brand, and no supplier has ever sued a supermarket for this 
unfair  practice29.  Likewise,  the  seemingly  decisive  “ranking”  practice  in  the  online 

29  
See  the  survey  “The  Dual  Role  of  the  Retailer”,  compiled  by  Incidence  for  AIM,  2015 
evidencing the magnitude of this fundamental distortion of the competitive process (“The objective of this 
survey  was  to  gather  concrete  facts  and  figures  on  the  dual  role  of  retailers  as  buyer/customer  and 

12	

	
 
																																																								
world  has  long  been  known  in  the  supermarket  world  as  category  management  and 
supermarkets  may  channel  consumers  into  buying  supermarket  brands  through  a 
panoply of tools such as non-listing/delisting of competing brands, copycat, self-space 
management, seemingly archaic but truly effective biased coaching –switch marketing - 
by  store  staff  or  online  shopping  assistants  and  pricing  strategies  that  create  artificial 
price differentials between third-party brands and their own brands.  

In short, none of the arguments tabled in order to differentiate online gatekeepers from 
supermarkets  or  any  other  offline  competitive  bottlenecks  stand  rigorous  scrutiny. 
Conversely,  there  is  ample  evidence,  collected  over  many  years,  that  supermarkets’ 
gatekeeper  role  in  the  Fast  Moving  Consumer  Goods  sector  and,  most  notably,  in  the 
food  category  is  much  more  prominent  than  that  of  any  online  platform  in  any  given 
sector.  The  supermarkets’  role  of  competitive  bottlenecks  is  stronger  than  that  of 
Amazon in the FMCG sector for the following reasons:  

First,  whereas  Amazon  formally  claims  to  be  an  open  marketplace,  supermarkets  are 
closed ecosystems and they reserve the right to list/unlist suppliers and their products at 
will and, more importantly, they control the fate of innovations.  

Second, whereas supermarkets have openly admitted or, at least, never refused having 
relied  on  the  know  how  provided  by  suppliers  of  third-party  brands  to  design  and 
market  their  own  brands,  Amazon  has  claimed  before  the  US  Senate’s  antitrust 
committee  that  its  internal  policy  prevents  it  from  doing  so30,  even  though  the  Wall 
Street Journal revealed on 23.04.2020 breaches of this corporate policy31. Amazon itself 
has  compared  its  own  policy  and  limited  market  presence  with  that  of  WalMart,  the 
largest US supermarket: 

“Amazon News @amazonnews · Apr 23, 2019 

We don’t use individual sellers’ data to launch private label products (which account for only about 1% 
of sales). And sellers aren’t being “knocked out” – they’re seeing record sales every year. Also, Walmart 
is much larger; Amazon is less than 4% of U.S. retail.” 

Third,  despite  Amazon’s  and  other  pure  online  players’  attempts  to  enter  the  grocery 
retailing  sector,  their  market  shares  are  marginal  and  the  leading  offline  supermarkets 

competitor during 2012-2014. It especially addresses the abuse of this dual role when customer power is 
used  to  obtain  sensitive  information  on  manufacturer  new  product  development  and  this  information  is 
then  used  to  give  unfair  competitive  advantage  to  their  private  label  business.”)  and  Copenhagen 
Business  School,  “The  dual  role  of  retailing  –  The  European  Survey”,  February  2019  (“Executive 
summary – Key findings: 1 – Extensive launch of new products – lower retention rate after first year (…); 
2  –  Extensive  trade  related  barriers  when  introducing  new  products  in  retail  (…);  3  –  Sensitive 
information in relation to new products is requested shared with retailers (…); 4– Safeguards and NDA 
are rarely used between manufacturer and retailers (…); 5  – Information shared is misused to develop 
private  labels  (…);  6  –  Consequences  of  misuse  experienced  are  lost  turnover  and  lost  market  share 
(…)”. 
30  
CNBC,  “Amazon  exec  tells  lawmakers  the  company  doesn’t  favor  own  brands  over  products 
sold  by  third-party  merchants”,  16  de  Julio  de  2019,  https://www.cnbc.com/2019/07/16/amazon-tells-
house-it-doesnt-favor-own-brands-in-antitrust-hearing.html 
31  
WSJ,  “Amazon  Scooped  Up  Data  From  Its  Own  Sellers  to  Launch  Competing  Products”, 
22.04.2020, 
https://www.wsj.com/articles/amazon-scooped-up-data-from-its-own-sellers-to-launch-
competing-products-11587650015.  More  information  on  CNBC,  “Amazon  uses  data  from  third-party 
sellers 
23.04.2020, 
products,  WSJ 
https://www.cnbc.com/2020/04/23/wsj-amazon-uses-data-from-third-party-sellers-to-develop-its-own-
products.html. 

investigation 

develop 

finds”, 

own 

its 

to 

13	

	
																																																								
command  the  online  distribution  channel  as  well.  In  many  categories,  supermarkets’ 
own  brands  exceed  the  50%  combined  market  share  and  the  largest  supermarkets  in 
each  geographic  market  account  for  the  largest  part  of  this  number.    Indeed,  grocery 
retailing is the only sector where Amazon has established an offline presence, pointing 
to the indispensability of an offline store in order to be a viable competitor.   

Fourth, Amazon users (including their prime members) tend to multi-home more than 
grocery  shoppers.  For  example,  an  Amazon  user  willing  to  buy  a  mobile  home  will 
certainly search the Amazon offering but by searching on Google shopping it will have 
direct  access  to  the  offerings  of  many  other  marketplaces/retailers  or  to  the  results  of 
price-comparison sites. However, a grocery shopper may search and compare different 
supermarkets  once  (e.g.,  when  he/she  locates  to  a  new  dwelling/workplace)  and 
afterwards  remains  loyal  to  the  chosen  store.  The  repetitive,  low-value  and  “boring” 
shopping experience explains this single-homing pattern32. 

Fifth, alliances of supermarkets have reinforced supermarkets “intermediary” role (i.e., 
they  provide  services  to  their  suppliers).  The  clusters  or  sometimes  overlapping 
international  and  national  alliances  offer  services  to  suppliers  and  also  procure 
supermarket brands for their members. These services are nothing else than access fees, 
because  suppliers  cannot  contract  with  alliance  members  as  long  as  they  have  not 
reached  an  agreement  with  the  alliance.  These  alliances  may  reinforce  the  vertical 
exploitation  of  suppliers  but  also  may  serve  a  horizontal  foreclosure  goal:  they  raise 
independent suppliers’ costs and show a commitment of the alliance members to their 
own  common  brand  to  the  detriment  of  independent  brands.  The  European 
Commission, following numerous requests from the European Parliament, is reflecting 
on  these  alliances  and  has  commissioned  a  study  from  the  Joint  Research  Centre33. 

32  
See,  for  a  comprehensive  assessment  of  shoppers’  single-homing  trend,  Javier  Berasategi, 
“Supermarket  Power:  Serving  Consumers  or  Harming  Competition”,  2014,  Section  5.3.1.4  -  Consumer 
lock-in:  (“(…).The  comprehensive  study  of  the  UK  grocery  shopper’s  behaviour  has  evidenced  that 
convenience/location is a key factor in the selection of the preferred/main store for grocery shopping236: 
car  journey  to  the  store  has  gone  down  on  average  to  10  minutes237  and  more  consumers  reach  their 
store  other  than  by  car,  most  notably  by  foot238.  Furthermore,  customers’  perceived  “loyalty”  to  the 
main  store  has  grown  from  58%  to  65%239.  This  suggests  that  grocery  shoppers  are  locked-into  a 
deterministic  (constrained)  demand  pattern/routine240,  driven  primarily  by  the  geographical  proximity 
of the store241, and the rare changes in their shopping behaviour respond to changes in the household 
context  rather  than  changes  in  the  parameters  of  competition  between  existing  stores242.  (…).  The 
conclusions of the Portsmouth Study can be extrapolated to other grocery markets in the EU and beyond. 
In particular, the importance of proximity/convenience in the selection of the main grocery store and the 
high  degree  of  loyalty  to  the  main  store  is  almost  a  universal  principle245.  For  example,  Nielsen  data 
reveals that store loyalty is a global phenomenon in the grocery retailing: (…)  
As far as the UK is concerned, the findings of the The Portsmouth Study are in line with the conclusions 
of the consumer survey made for the UK Grocery Report 2000246.(…). Loyalty to the preferred store was 
also  found  to  be  significant.  At  the  time,  85%  of  shoppers  had  used  the  same  store  over  the  past  year. 
54% of shoppers claimed to almost always visit the same supermarket for their main grocery shopping, 
whilst 26% were semi-loyal and 14% regularly used two stores. (…).  
As  far  as  the  Spanish  grocery  retail  market  is  concerned,  several  surveys  highlight  the  critical 
importance of the proximity/loyalty to the main store. For example, a study from the Spanish Ministry for 
Agriculture reveals the evolution of consumer loyalty to the supermarkets. In 2010, 83% of the surveyed 
consumers  revealed  that  they  like  to  shop  at  the  same  stores  and  79.9%  of  them  expressed  that  they 
normally shop at the stores closest to their home. (…)” 
33  
supply 
https://ec.europa.eu/jrc/en/publication/eur-scientific-and-technical-research-reports/retail-alliances-
agricultural-and-food-supply-chain  

Colen, Bouamra-Mechemache, Daskalova, and Nes, “Retail alliances in the agricultural and food 
2020, 
Joint 

Commission’s 

European 

Research 

chain”, 

Centre 

(JRC), 

14	

	
																																																								
However,  as  the  study  has  conceded,  these  alliances  seem  to  fall  outside  the  realm  of 
competition  rules  and  only  regulatory  remedies  seem  to  be  able  to  address  their 
exploitative and exclusionary practices.   

Sixth,  at  least  from  2003  onwards,  several  economists  have  developed  models  where 
supermarkets’  self-preference  may  distort  competition  in  the  market  and,  most 
importantly, reduce innovation:  

- 

- 

- 

- 

Bergès-Sennou,  Bontems  and  Réquillart,  2003,  Economic  impact  of  the  development  of 
private  labels,  1st  Biennal  Conference  of  the  Food  System  Research  Group,  University  of 
Wisconsin, Madison, June, 26-27 (“In a longer term analysis, even if no specific work has 
been  done  on  this  topic,  the  impact  of  PL  could  well  be  less  positive.  The  argument  is  the 
following:  the  development  of  PLs  leads  to  a  different  share  of  profits  within  vertical 
structures. A decrease in the profits of the upstream producers could lead to less innovation 
and thus reduce the variety of goods available to consumers. This mechanism is reinforced 
by the strategy of retailers who develop ‘me-too’ products. This strategy is nothing else than 
free-riding on research and development of new products. This free-riding will discourage 
the  efforts  devoted  to  the  development  of  new  products  in  the  long  term.  Moreover,  the 
development of PLs can modify competition between retailers in the long term. For example, 
PLs  enable  greater  differentiation  between  retailers  and  thus  lower  price  competition 
among retailers which is detrimental to welfare (for  a discussion on long-term effects, see 
Dobson, 1998)”).   
Mark Armstrong, “Competition in Two-sided platforms’, Rand Journal of Economics, 37 (3) 
2006,  pp.668-691  (“This  level  of  payment  will  exclude  some  high-cost  suppliers  whose 
presence in the supermarkets is nevertheless socially desirable. In other words, payments to 
suppliers  are  too  low  from  a  social  point  of  view  and  there  are  too  few  products  on  the 
shelves.  How  well  consumers  are  treated  depends  on  the  competitive  conditions  on  their 
side.  If  they  choose  their  supermarket  according  to  the  Hotelling  specification,  consumers 
keep the joint surplus except for the market power element retained by the supermarkets.”). 
Marie-Laure Allain, Claire Chambolle, and Patrick Rey, “Vertical Integration, Information 
and  Foreclosure”,  TSE  Working  Paper,  n.  11-237,  March  2011,  revised  November  2011 
(“This  paper  studies  the  impact  of  vertical  integration  on  competition  and  performance  in 
markets where firms need to exchange sensitive information in order to interact efficiently 
with  their  suppliers  or  customers.  We  show  that,  by  altering  a  supplier’s  incentives  to 
protect  or  exploit  its  customers’  information,  vertical  integration  degrades  the  supplier’s 
ability  to  interact  with  downstream  competitors.  In  case  of  limited  competition  upstream, 
this leads to input foreclosure, raises rivals’ cost and limits both upstream competition and 
downstream  development.  A  similar  concern  of  customer  foreclosure  arises  in  the  case  of 
downstream bottlenecks” and footnote 2: “Brand manufacturers have for example stressed 
such  issues  in  connection  with  the  development  of  private  labels.  As  the  promotional 
activities  associated  with  the  launch  of  new  products  generally  require  advance  planning 
with  the  main  retailers,  manufacturers  are  concerned  that  it  gives  these  retailers  an 
opportunity  to  reduce  or  even  eliminate  the  lead  time  before  the  apparition  of  “me-too" 
private labels.”). 
Inderst,  Roman  &  Jakubovic,  Zlata  &  Jovanovic,  Dragan,  2015.  "Buyer  Power  and 
Functional  Competition  for  Innovation,"  MPRA  Paper  61214,  University  Library  of 
Munich,  Germany  (“Our  analysis  starts  from  the  observation  that  with  progressive 
consolidation in retailing and the spread of private labels, retailers increasingly take over 
functions in the vertical chain. Focusing on innovation, we isolate various reasons for why 
when a large retailer grows in size, this can lead to an inefficient shift of innovation activity 
away  from  manufacturers  and  to  the  large  retailer.  One  rationale  for  this  is  the  retailer’s 
control  of  access  to  consumers,  which  gives  rise  to  a  rent-appropriation  motive  for 
innovation,  next  to  a  hold-up  problem.  With  retail  competition,  through  crowding  out  the 

15	

	
- 

- 

- 

27.04.2020, 

“Amazon,  Antitrust, 

and  Private  Label  Goods”, 

manufacturer’s  innovative  activity,  a  large  retailer  obtains  a  competitive  advantage  vis-à-
vis smaller retailers. We further analyze when inefficiencies are aggravated in case a large 
retailer’s presence threatens the manufacturer with imitation of his innovations.”) 
Stéphane Caprice, and Shiva Shekhar, “On the countervailing power of large retailers when 
shopping  costs  matter”,  TSE  Working  Paper,  n.  17-771,  March  2017  (“Another  policy 
implication follows: as wholesale prices are less distorted under a ban on slotting fees, we 
can claim that banning slotting fees increases social welfare.”) 
Stéphane  Caprice,  “Private  Label  Positioning  and  Product  Line”  TSE  Working  Papers  17-
816,  Toulouse  School  of  Economics  (TSE),  2017  (“This  article  examines  (i)  how  retailers 
position private label products, (ii) why private labels are sold in some product categories 
but  not  in  others,  and  why  some  national  brand  products  may  have  difficulty  in  accessing 
retailers' shelves, (iii) why some private label products are positioned as "premium" brands, 
and  (iv)  how  consumers'  surplus  and  total  welfare  are  affected  by  private  labels.  We  find 
that  private  label  positioning  leads  to  less  differentiation  in  product  category,  which 
structurally changes a retailer's product line in return. Consumer welfare and total welfare 
are lower.”) 
Alec  Stapp, 
https://medium.com/@progressivepolicyinstitute/amazon-antitrust-and-private-label-goods-
bf8b8cc00e99 (“1. All major retailers use data on what sells in stores to build their private 
label businesses. (…) 2. Amazon is not dominant in retail: “(…). It seems difficult to argue 
that it’s a problem when Amazon uses data to inform its private label business, but not when 
a company [Wal Mart] more than three times its size ($388 billion vs. $121 billion) does the 
same  thing  at  a  rate  15  times  higher  (15%  vs.  1%)”.  3.  Online  retail  platforms  are  more 
open to competition than physical stores: (…). It also seems worth noting that prior to the 
internet, third-party sellers had no option at all for selling directly to consumers. They had 
to  negotiate  with  one  of  the  big  box  retailers  for  placement  on  store  shelves.  Online 
platforms give them a new channel for reaching customers directly). (…) 4. Retailers don’t 
have  private  data  on  cost  structures  for  manufacturers:  (….).  Yes,  Amazon  has  more  data 
than  rival  brick-and-mortar  retailers  (particularly  on  what  consumers  look  at  but  never 
purchase), but the jury is still out on how much of a competitive advantage this affords them 
relative to big players like Walmart (which also has its own online marketplace and spends 
more on IT per year than Microsoft and Facebook). (…). 5. The only difference between a 
platform and a retailer is inventory risk: (…). First, it’s important to know that ad fees on 
Amazon are analogous to slotting fees in brick and mortar stores. Brands have been paying 
for promotion in retail long before the e-commerce revolution. Prime shelf space and prime 
search  rankings  are  both  scarce  resources  that  are  auctioned  off  to  the  highest  bidder. 
According  to  data  from  the  Center  for  Science  in  the  Public  Interest,  food  manufacturers 
spend  70%  of  their  marketing  budgets  on  these  “trade  promotion  fees”  and  30%  on 
advertising. At the end of the day, it’s all marketing. Second, while it’s true that Amazon is 
simultaneously  a  retailer,  producer,  and  platform,  this  is  not  economically  different  from 
traditional  retailing.  I’ve  already  explained  how  legacy  retailers  also  engage  in  private 
label  and  are  therefore  “producers.”  And  while  they  are  not  “platforms”  in  the  technical 
sense  of  being  open  to  anyone  (sounds…  anticompetitive),  the  business  model  is  not 
significantly different. Traditional retail charges a markup on the price paid to wholesalers 
or  manufacturers  (a  percentage  of  the  final  retail  price).  The  retailer  can  either  purchase 
that  inventory  outright  and  assume  the  risk  of  it  not  selling,  or  it  can  include  a  “sale  or 
return”  provision,  which  reserves  the  retailer  the  right  to  return  the  inventory  to  the 
wholesaler or manufacturer if it does not sell. Inventory risk is just another cost and can be 
traded off with other contract provisions during the negotiating process. Platforms, on the 
other hand, do not take custody of the inventory and instead provide services to sellers. In 
exchange,  the  platform  charges  a  percentage  of  the  final  retail  price.  Whether  it’s  a 
platform or a retailer, the business is the same: Partner with companies selling goods and 
collect a profit margin on the final retail price. The rest is just accounting.”) 

16	

	
Seventh, different studies have found evidence of adverse effects on innovation in the 
FMCG sector across the EU34 and, most notably, in Spain35.  

Eighth,  many  legal  scholars  have  exposed  the  legal  gaps  of  competition  rules  when  it 
comes  to  addressing  supermarkets’  exploitative  and  self-preference  practices  vis-à-vis 
their suppliers:  

label  products,  de-listing  of 

“The past decade has seen growing antitrust concerns about the impact of private label goods on 
consumer welfare and competition in the grocery trade. Market investigations of the sector have 
been launched in several Member States, and there have also been legislative attempts to curb the 
power  of  large  grocery  retailers.  Private  labels  have  provoked  interest  not  only  because  they 
increase  the  bargaining  power  of  a  retailer,  but  also  because  they  fundamentally  change  the 
relationship  between  retailers  and  suppliers  from  one  between  trading  partners  to  one  between 
competitors. Because they place the retailer in the double role of a customer and a competitor of 
its  suppliers,  private  labels  are  believed  to  create  incentives  for  the  grocery  chains  to  resort  to 
practices,  which  in  turn  lead  to  unfavorable  outcomes  for  the  consumers.  Some  of  these 
practices  include:  misuse  of  a  branded  good’s  product  information  to  introduce  competing 
them  with 
private 
undifferentiated me-too private labels, and using the strict rules on resale price maintenance to 
position  the  private  label  product  in  a  more  favorable  position  vis-à-vis  the  brand.  Legal 
scholars  and  practitioners  have  been  under  pressure  to  find  out in  what  ways  competition  rules 
may be used to limit these practices. The goal of this paper is to give a comprehensive overview of 
the competition law issues that might arise in the context of private labels. The paper is divided 
into two parts: first, it contextualizes the claims related to the welfare effects of the introduction 
and continued presence of private labels. It shows that private labels may lead to a reduction in 
consumer  welfare  and  discusses  the  practices  and  conditions  that  might  lead  to  this  negative 
outcome.  The  second  part  of  the  paper  sketches  the  applicable  legal  framework  under  EU 
competition  law  as  it  may  apply  to  the  practices  mentioned.  The  paper  concludes  with  a 
discussion  of  the  challenges  for  the  effective  treatment  of  harm  arising  from  the  retailer 
practices associated with private labels.

tertiary  brands 

to  replace 

in  order 

36   

for 

are 

the 

the 

(all 

study 

chain”, 

prepared 

available 

European 

stakeholder 

Commission, 

See,  most  notably,  LEI,  “The  impact  of  private  labels  on  the  competitiveness  of  the  European 
2011, 
supply 

34  
See “The economic impact of choice and innovation in the EU food sector”, independent report 
prepared  for  the  European  Commission,  and  the  discussion  on  the  evidence  of  negative  effects  on 
innovation,  despite  the  methodological  limitations  of  the  study,  in  the  submissions  of  AIM  and 
PROMARCA 
at 
submissions 
https://ec.europa.eu/competition/sectors/agriculture/overview_en.html.  
35  
food 
https://ec.europa.eu/growth/content/impact-private-labels-competitiveness-european-food-supply-chain-
0_en  (“The  number  of  new  product  introductions  has  become  very  low  in  Spain  due  to  the  fall  in  the 
number  of  new  product  introductions  from  2005  till  2009.  This  is  probably  due  to  the  growing  market 
share of discounters and other retail formulas with a limited product assortment (see section 6).” (p.91); 
CNC,  “Report  on  the  relations  between  manufacturers  and  retailers  in  the  food  sector”,  2011, 
https://www.cnmc.es/sites/default/files/1186012_7.pdf:  “That  higher  pace  of  investment,  however,  does 
not  seem  to  have  been  accompanied  by  similar  growth  in  the  introduction  of  new  products,  which  has 
slowed  during  the  economic  crisis,  which  may  end  up  curbing  innovation  in  the  future.  The  data  on 
introduction of new products from 2003 to 2010 in the eight product categories analysed in this Report 
indicate that the pace slowed during the last four years of that period (Figure 16), and more markedly in 
manufacturer brands (Figure 17) than in retailer private labels (Figure 18).” (p. 72); Kantar-WorldPanel 
la  Innovación”,  yearly  (2012-2019)  report  prepared  for  Promarca,  available  at 
“Radar  de 
http://www.promarca-spain.com/estudios/. 
36  
Daskalova,  V.  I.  (2012).  Private  labels  (Own  Brands)  in  the  Grocery  Sector:  Competition 
Concerns  and  Treatment  in  EU  Competition  Law.  (TILEC  Discussion  Paper;  Vol.  2012-002),  TILEC. 
Daskalova is the co-author of a study on retail alliances for the European Commission Comisión Europea: 
Colen, L., Bouamra-Mechemache. Z., Daskalova, V., Nes, K., Retail alliances in the agricultural and food 
supply  chain,  EUR  30206  EN,  European  Commission,  2020, 
ISBN  978-92-76-18585-7, 
doi:10.2760/33720, JRC120271. 

17	

	
																																																								
--- 

“Concern with chilling competition and ensuring accuracy has prompted the Commission to order 
an extensive study on the impact of retail concentration on choice and innovation, 170 but there is 
no knowledge of the Commission using its investigative powers to undertake dawn raids or sector 
inquiries, as it has done in other sectors in the past.171 When it comes to the food sector, at the 
EU level, no big case was pursued, no formal sector inquiry was opened, and no guidelines were 
introduced.172  This  stance  is  especially  peculiar  when  contrasted  with  the  approach  of  the 
Commission to similar competition concerns in other sectors. Let us consider the issue of private 
labels,  which  essentially  concerns  the  customer-competitor  conflict  between  supermarkets  and 
their  suppliers.  The  issue  of  supermarkets  replacing  ‘tier-B’  brands  with  own  label  products 
which  compete  head-to-head  with  other  brands  or  the  use  of  private  labels  as  threat  in 
negotiations,  has  been  discussed  in  the  competition  law  literature  for  more  than  a  decade 
already.  173  The  study  commissioned  by  DG  Competition  on  concentration  in  food  markets 
revealed  that  under  some  circumstances,  the  presence  of  private  labels  might  result  in  less 
innovation.174 No action has been undertaken by the Commission against the self-preferencing 
practices  of  supermarkets  in  the  case  of  private  labels.175  The  same  practice  of  self-
preferencing  is,  however,  at  the  core  of  the  decision  in  the  Google  Shopping  case.176  Even 
though there are debates as to the extent to which the existing EU competition law doctrine covers 
this theory of harm, 177 the Commission proceeded with the case. 

Another  example  concerns  the  attitude  of  the  Commission  on  matters  of  fairness  and 
distributive  justice,  especially  with  respect  to  the  division  of  ‘rents’  between  trading  partners. 
The Commission has been reluctant to intervene in such cases in the food supply chain.”

37

--- 

“In  recent  decades,  the  grocery  retail  sector  has  witnessed  a  trend  of  concentration  and  as  a 
result,  it  has  been  increasingly  dominated  by  large  retailers  with  significant  buyer  power  that 
enables  them  to  impose  their  position  when  bargaining  with  suppliers.  The  fact  that  these 
retailers have begun to offer private label products competing with brand products has brought 
a different dimension to this imbalanced relationship between retailers and suppliers. Although 
the introduction of those own labels has resulted in reduced prices and more choices, on the other 
hand, it has also increased the large retailers’ incentive to abuse their buyer power against brand 
product suppliers. 

The  main  EU  competition  law  rules,  ie  articles  101  and  102  TFEU,  fall  short  of  effectively 
addressing  those  behaviours  of  quasi-dominant  retailers.  The  reason  why  article  101  TFEU  is 
not  an  effective  tool  in  tackling  those  concerns  related  to  private  labels  is  that  the  retailers’ 
abusive  behaviours  usually  arise  from  unilateral  conduct  falling  outside  the  scope  of  the 
provision. However, article 102 TFEU is also unlikely to serve to address those concerns because 
it  is  very  rare  that  retailers  are  found  to  be  individually  or  collectively  in  dominant  position. 
Nevertheless, considering the abusive behaviours of retailers based on their bargaining power, 
which grants them an economic power similar to that of dominance, it seems necessary to utilise 
some other tools to eliminate those competition concerns.” 

38

--- 

“Traditional  competition  law  is  not  well-equipped  to  deal  with  the  anticompetitive  effects  of 
private  labels.  The  reason  is  that  the  retailing  sector  has  been  generally  considered  highly 
competitive,  because  of  its  low  profit  margins,  and  not  easily  lending  itself  to  monopolization, 
because  of  low  entry  costs.  Hence,  most  of  the  competition  practice  consists  of  merger  review, 
which  should  prevent  the  creation  of  single  firm  dominance  in  local  markets,  and  competition 

Daskalova,  Victoria  I.,  “Counterproductive  Regulation?  The  EU's  (Mis)Adventures 

37  
in 
Regulating Unfair Trading Practices in the Food Supply Chain” (September 26, 2018). TILEC Discussion 
Paper No. 2018-027.  
38  
(2012), 106-137.	

S.Erzene, “Buyer power in the Context of Private Label in the EU”, Global Antitrust Review 106 

18	

	
 
 
																																																								
advocacy urging for the removal of legal barriers to entry that exist in a number of EU Member 
States (e.g. France and Belgium36). Moreover, the buyer power of supermarkets has been seen as 
a positive competitive force, which may limit the power of branded good manufacturers to impose 
price increases. As a consequence, the prohibitions of competition law have been designed and 
interpreted  mainly  as  instruments  to  curb  market  power  on  the  supply  side  of  the  market. 
Current rules of competition law cannot easily cope with anticompetitive exclusionary effects of 
superior  bargaining  power  of  vertically  integrated  retailers.  Such  analysis  boils  down  to  a 
control of unilateral behaviour of a powerful company, which is not necessarily dominant in the 
traditional sense (Article 102 TFEU), because of its low market share.”

39

Ninth, in light of the failure of competition rules to address supermarkets’ exploitative 
practices, regulatory remedies have been adopted in countries all over the world40. The 
outstanding  question  from  a  regulatory  standpoint  is  why  supermarkets  are  prevented 
from exploiting their trading partners but not for self-preferencing their brands (the only 
exception  being  the  ban  on  the  misuse  of  suppliers  trade  secrets  in  force  in  some 
jurisdictions  such  as  Spain  –  article  13  of  Law  12/2013  –  and  article  3.1.g)  of  the 
Directive 2019/633).  

5  Conclusions 

The EU has a long track record of regulating competitive bottlenecks. This track record 
evidences  that  competitive  bottlenecks  may  arise  in  different  sectors  and  business 
models, both online and offline, but all of them share some common features that have 
been  exposed  in  the  economic  literature  and  were  applied  in  the  Travelpot/Worldspan 
merger decision.  

These bottleneck features are present in many online activities intermediating between 
business users and consumers (e.g., Amazon and Google) but even more compellingly 
in the grocery retailing sector. Therefore, authorities and experts advising them should 
not  err  trying  to  differentiate  supermarkets  from  online  platforms  with  flawed 
arguments in order to avoid the comparison between supermarkets unconstrained self-
preference of their own brands and any future proposal to ban self-preference by online 
platforms. On the contrary, this contribution has identified eight grounds supporting the 
conclusion that supermarkets nowadays exhibit more powerful bottleneck features than 
an  online  platform  such  as  Amazon.  Indeed,  the  regulatory  remedies  against 
supermarkets’  exploitative  practices  adopted  in  many  countries  across  the  world  and 
most notably in most of the EU Member States evidence that these operators are already 
regulated due to their competitive bottleneck status and the experience gained assessing 

H Nevo and R van den Bergh, ‘Private Labels: Challenges for Competition Law and Economics’ 

39  
(2017) 40(2) World Competition, 271. 
40  
For an overview of the regulatory developments in the EU and the Member States, reference is 
made to the Commission’s Green paper on unfair trading practices in the business-to-business food and 
non-food supply chain in Europe, COM/2013/037 final, Commission’s Communication - Tackling unfair 
trading practices in the business-to-business food supply chain, COM/2014/0472 final, the “Study on the 
legal framework covering business-to-business unfair trade practices in the retail supply chain”, prepared 
the  European  Commission,  DG  Internal  Market,  DG 
by  members  of  CEPS  and  EUI  for 
MARKT/2012/049/E, 26.02.2014, and Fabrizio Caffagi and Paola Iamicelli, “Unfair trading practices in 
the  business-to-business  retail  supply  chain  -  An  overview  on  EU  Member  States  legislation  and 
enforcement mechanisms”, European Commission’s Joint Research Centre’s Technical Reports, 5.9.2018. 

19	

	
 
 
 
																																																								
their  trading  practices  and  their  competitive  effects  should  inspire  and  justify  the 
regulation of online bottlenecks’ practices41.  

Finally,  the  regulation  of  online  bottlenecks  should  guarantee  a  level  playing  field 
between them and other offline bottlenecks competing in the same sector. For example, 
once  concluded  that  banning  Amazon  from  applying  self-preference  as  well  as  other 
exploitative  practices  is  justified  in  light  of  its  competitive  bottleneck  status,  the 
coherence of the regulatory framework would call at least for the same prohibitions to 
apply to supermarkets competing against Amazon in the grocery sector. Otherwise, how 
could it be justified from a sound regulatory policy standpoint that a company enjoying 
a  marginal  market  share  of  the  sales  in  a  given  market  was  subject  to  more  stringent 
obligations than the leading operators in the same market?42  

that 

The European Parliament’s most recent Resolution on competition policy has correctly 
identified 
and 
exploitative/exclusionary  abuses  emerge  indistinctly  in  offline  and  online  markets  and 
that the required regulatory response should ensure consistency treatment of online and 
offline bottlenecks, especially if they are competing in the same sectors.  

the  gatekeeper/bottleneck 

issues,  dual 

conflict 

role 

“29.  Stresses that some entities, which benefit from dual status as both platforms and suppliers, 
abuse  their  position  to  impose  unfair  terms  and  conditions  on  competitors,  independently  of 
whether they are active online or offline; calls on the Commission to look into the issue of self-
preferencing  and  enforce  the  necessary  laws  and  use  the  instruments  required  on  those  entities 
that  practice  self-preferencing;  calls  on  the  Commission  to  assess  the  possibility  of  imposing  ex 
ante regulatory obligations where competition law is not enough to ensure contestability in these 
markets, therefore avoiding competitors’ foreclosure and ensuring that emerging bottlenecks are 
not perpetuated by the monopolisation of future innovation; 

(…) 

62.  Calls on the Commission to guarantee fair competition and greater transparency in offline 
platforms’ commercial practices, including supermarket and hypermarkets, so as to ensure that 
EU  producers  receive  fair  conditions  and  prices  for  their  products;  calls  on  the  Commission  to 
continue its in-depth analysis on the extent and effect of buying alliances, related to both pricing 
and non-pricing strategies, on the economic functioning of the agricultural and food supply chain, 
taking particular account of the effects on small-scale suppliers and farmers; regrets the fact that 
selling at a loss is not on the list of practices that are prohibited at EU level; highlights that the 
Farm to Fork strategy and EU competition law must recognise the important contribution made 
by primary producers in supplying high-quality food and delivering public goods to society”

43: 

The  Opinion  of  the  European  Parliament’s  AGRI  Committee,  annexed  to  the  Draft 
Resolution, expressly stressed the “parallels” between Amazon’s dual role practices and 
those of supermarkets: 

41  
Certainly,  the  regulatory  remedies  on  supermarkets’  practices  have  focused  on  exploitative 
abuses  and  have  so  far  only  dealt  with  one  specific  manifestation  of  the  self-preference  principle  (the 
misuse  of  the  suppliers’  trade  secrets  in  order  to  favour  their  own  brands),  but  the  lack  of  a  more 
comprehensive treatment of the self-preference only shows a gap – an area of impunity - in the regulation 
of supermarkets’ practices.  
42  
The marginal role of Amazon in the grocery sector is evidenced under any measurement system. 
For  example,  the  grocery  sales  intermediated/resold  online  by  Amazon  as  well  as  its  offline  sales 
represent a small margin of the leading supermarkets’ online and offline sales in each Member State of 
the EU, as well as in any other country outside the EU.		
43  
(2019/2131(INI)), https://www.europarl.europa.eu/doceo/document/TA-9-2020-0158_EN.html 

European  Parliament  resolution  of  18  June  2020  on  competition  policy  –  annual  report  2019 

20	

	
																																																								
“18. Welcomes the publication of Regulation (EU) 2019/1150 of the European Parliament and of 
the Council of 20 June 2019 on promoting fairness and transparency for business users of online 
intermediation  services[25];  takes  note  of  the  opening  by  the  Commission  of  a  formal  antitrust 
investigation  to  assess  Amazon’s  use  of  sensitive  data  from  independent  retailers  and  possible 
abuses  of  its  dual  role  as  retailer  and  marketplace,  and  expresses  concerns  about  possible 
that  possible  differentiated  or 
parallels 
discriminatory treatment between own brands and other retail goods might distort competition in 
the market and reduce innovation and product choice for consumers; stresses that the Commission 
and national competition authorities must play their roles in ensuring that such situations do not 
arise;”44 

in  European  supermarket  platforms;  stresses 

In  light  of  the  foregoing,  both  the  New  Competition  Tool  and  the  regulation  of 
Gatekeeper Online Platforms are indispensable legal tools to address offline and online 
competitive  bottlenecks  and  both  of  them  should  be  applied  coherently  in  order  to 
ensure  a  level  playing  field  between  online  and  offline  competitive  bottlenecks 
competing in the same markets. 

44  
OPINION  OF  THE  COMMITTEE  ON  AGRICULTURE  AND  RURAL  DEVELOPMENT 
(28.1.2020) for the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs on competition policy – annual report 
2019 (2019/2131(INI)), https://www.europarl.europa.eu/doceo/document/A-9-2020-0022_EN.html#title3	

21	

	
 
  
																																																								
