Ref. Ares(2020)4626558 - 05/09/2020

News  Media  Europe  submission 
the  European 
Commission  public  consultations  on  the  “Digital  Services 
Act package (DSA)” and the “New Competition Tool (NCT)” 

to 

News Media Europe (NME) represents the progressive news media industry in  Europe  – over 2,500 
media  companies  including  newspapers,  radio,  television  and  internet.  News  Media  Europe  is 
committed  to  maintaining  and  promoting  the  freedom  of  the  press,  to  upholding  and  enhancing  the 
freedom  to  publish,  and  to  championing  the  news  brands,  which  are  one  of  the  most  vital  parts  of 
Europe’s creative industries. 

Recommendations 

•  NME  welcomes  plans  to  establish  a  DSA  and  NCT  and  calls  on  the  European 
Commission  for  ambitious  legislative  proposals  to  shape  a  safer,  more 
competitive and inclusive digital future for Europe; 

•  NME  stresses  that  discussions  related  to  the  DSA  and  the  NCT  are  difficult  but 
timely,  with  the  recognition  that  certain  platforms  routinely  engage  in  harmful 
market conduct at the expense of other actors, including the news media; 

•  NME highlights that large online platforms are exerting negative pressure on the 
media industry and by extension on media pluralism, by extracting excess rents 
that prevent the proper funding of content and journalism in particular;  

•  NME  supports  a  strengthened  secondary  liability  framework  for  intermediaries 
that  acknowledges  differences  between  content  hosts  and  content  producers, 
and that offers a conditional safe harbour; 

•  NME stresses the need for a robust ex-ante DSA framework to regulate the market 
conduct of digital gatekeepers, by prohibiting practices with clear harmful effects 
such as self-preferencing and data disintermediation; 

•  NME  stresses  the  need  for  a  market-based  NCT  instrument  alongside  ex-ante 
rules to address the  current enforcement gap,  and sees  added value in an NCT 
that allows swift intervention in markets, with the ability to impose remedies;  

•  NME stresses that discussions on the sensitivities associated with certain forms 
of online advertisement should take due consideration of existing European data 
protection and privacy regulation.  

EU Transparency Register ID: 577812220311-81  

News Media Europe – Square de Meeûs 25 – 1000 Brussels – Belgium – BE 0647.900.810 

1 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table of Contents 

1. Introductory remarks................................................................................................ 3 

2. The impact of major platforms on media pluralism ............................................. 3 

3. The liability regime of digital services acting as intermediaries ........................ 5 

3.1 Illegal content: the notice-and-take-down mechanism......................................... 6 

3.2 Reviewing the eCommerce Directive liability regime for online intermediaries .. 8 

3.3 Clarifying responsibilities for online platforms .................................................... 10 

3.4 Disinformation as harmful content ...................................................................... 11 

4. The gatekeeper power of online platforms ......................................................... 12 

4.1 Challenges with digital gatekeepers ................................................................... 13 

4.2 Disintermediation problems ................................................................................ 15 

4.3 Competition concerns of news publishers in online advertising ........................ 18 

4.4 Lack of transparency in the ad-tech supply chain .............................................. 21 

4.5 Problems with bargaining power in digital markets ............................................ 23 

4.6 Dealing with imbalances in bargaining power .................................................... 26 

5. Addressing structural market problems through a New Competition Tool ... 27 

5.1 Reflections on the scope and purpose of a new competition tool ..................... 28 

5.2 Harmful market conduct by large platforms not in the scope of the EU 
competition framework .............................................................................................. 29 

5.3 How the new competition tool could address the concerns of the news media 30 

6. Emerging issues in online advertising ................................................................ 31 

6.1 Transparency in commercial communications ................................................... 32 

6.2 Political advertising ............................................................................................. 32 

6.3 Advertising Technology “Ad-Tech” ..................................................................... 33 

6.4 Personal data and advertising ............................................................................ 35 

News Media Europe – Square de Meeûs 25 – 1000 Brussels – Belgium – BE 0647.900.810 

2 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1. Introductory remarks  

News Media Europe welcomes the opportunity to take part in the evidence-gathering 
exercise towards  the Digital Services Act  (DSA) package and the New Competition 
Tool (NCT). Our feedback will focus mainly on the review of the intermediary liability 
regime,  the  responsibilities  of  online  intermediaries,  issues  arising  from  digital 
gatekeepers alongside broader structural competition issues in digital markets, and the 
introduction of a new competition tool.  

Press publishers  in particular have  important expectations  associated with the DSA 
and  NCT,  with  the  hope  that  they  will  support  the  key  democratic  function  of 
professional journalism in a fair and inclusive digital environment. With this in mind, 
these  instruments  should  actively  contribute  towards  enhanced  media  freedom and 
creating a level-playing field between news media and tech companies.  

The DSA in particular constitutes a unique opportunity to promote responsible actors 
in the online space by focusing on the regulation of intermediaries. It is clear that such 
intermediaries now play a critical if not systemic role in society across a broad range 
of issues that span beyond mere economic considerations. Indeed, it is crucial that the 
impact of large platforms on the plurality and sustainability of the media is addressed.  

In  our  view,  the  DSA  should  therefore  contribute  to  strengthening  freedom  of 
expression,  editorial  control,  the  protection  of  journalistic  sources,  and  the  financial 
independence of journalism, while the NCT should complement a clear set of robust 
ex-ante  rules  foreseen  in  the  DSA  package  to  ensure  a  coherent  competition 
framework that can tackle the abusive market conduct of certain platforms. 

Importantly, the DSA should not undermine existing media-specific legislation such as 
the Audiovisual Media Services Directive (EU) 2018/1808 and the Copyright Directive 
(EU)  2019/790.  If  overlaps  are  inevitable,  they  should  strengthen  media-specific 
regimes, not undermine them, and preserve existing and effective forms of regulation 
which continue to prove their effectiveness in maintaining high standards of journalism.  

The  governance  of  a  future  DSA  should  involve  cooperation  between  competent 
national authorities and coordination at EU level to bring procedural efficiencies and 
improved cross-border enforcement. The creation of a European agency should only 
be considered on the basis of practical necessity. 

2. The impact of major platforms on media pluralism 

The  emergence  of  online  platforms  over  the  past  two  decades  has  contributed 
positively  to  the  spread  of  online  news  content,  helping  news  publishers  to  reach 

News Media Europe – Square de Meeûs 25 – 1000 Brussels – Belgium – BE 0647.900.810 

3 

 
 
 
 
 
 
greater audiences than ever before. However, online platforms have also had a huge 
adverse impact on media pluralism in Europe and beyond globally.  

There are multiple underlying reasons for this, but above all is the understanding that 
the phenomenal growth and profits achieved by certain platforms have taken place at 
the expense of other market participants.  

It has become clear over recent years that large and powerful online platforms have 
overtaken  media  companies  and  content  producers  in  their  capacity  as  the  main 
beneficiaries of digital media content1. Certain large online platforms are able through 
intermediation to monetise the biggest share of the value of third-party content, mainly 
through advertising.  

Indeed, certain online platforms now profit disproportionately from third-party content 
that  they  do  not  produce,  ultimately  to  the  detriment  of  media  plurality.  That  is 
particularly true when one considers what the real added value of their service is: mere 
intermediation. Yet with the unique structure of digital markets, platforms are able to 
extract significant excess value from third-party content that sits in sharp contrast with 
the actual value they offer.  

This  means  that  it  has  become  much  more  difficult  to  develop  self-sufficient, 
sustainable businesses in the news industry, which also undermines the ability of the 
market to sustain more companies and therefore greater media plurality in the form of 
higher  participation  in  the  market.  That,  in  turn,  has  been  a  key  driver  of  growth  in 
market concentration since economies of scale have become a necessity to maintain 
profitability.  

Overall, this broader shift in the allocation of profits along the media value-chain has 
created  a  serious  and  fundamental  problem.  The  profits  derived  from  monetising 
content are no longer flowing back to media companies and producers of content, and 
instead stay within platforms ecosystems, which in turn further undermines business 
models and content production in the broader media sector.  

Ultimately, unless a direct and fair split approach to advertising revenues derived from 
monetisation of third party content is adopted, or some form of “new deal for online 
media” is achieved, it is very likely that problems related to funding of media content 
will persist and worsen, in particular when it comes to news content because it is so 
reliant on advertising for funding in the first place2.  

Both Google and Facebook often reduce the debate about the commercial and social 
value of journalistic content to a simplistic argument which suggests that the provision 

1 Digital Content Next (2017) Distributed Content Revenue Benchmark Report (link) 
2 Australian Competition & Consumer Commission (2019) Digital platforms inquiry (link) 

News Media Europe – Square de Meeûs 25 – 1000 Brussels – Belgium – BE 0647.900.810 

4 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of  web  traffic  constitutes  a  one-way,  altruistic and  charity-like  exchange  of  value  in 
favour of publishers, who in turn should be grateful for the mere existence of these 
platforms.  

This is of course a deeply flawed reasoning and demonstrates poor judgement and a 
lack of consideration for other non-commercial concerns of a broader, social value. 
This line of reasoning also completely ignores and dismisses the fact that it is third 
party  content,  including  journalistic  content,  that  brings  users  in  the  first  place  to 
platforms.  

While  the  ability  of  the  biggest  technology  platforms  to  act  independently  of  other 
market  participants  increases,  they  also  play  an  important  role  in  defining  future 
formats for digital content and are already attempting to unilaterally dictate and shape 
the  future  of  news,  powered  through  artificial  intelligence  and  machine  learning. 
Google’s  Google  Assistant  and  Amazon’s  Alexa  voice-based  assistant  are  good 
examples of this3.  

Such  products  already  show  that  providing  traffic,  advertising  revenues,  brand 
attribution  or  any  form  of  payment  or  remuneration  if  any  to  media  companies  and 
content  producers,  are  not  concerns  at  all.  This  is  deeply  concerning  for  several 
reasons as it reinforces the abusive cycle of exploitation of third-party content along 
lines that undermine the principle of fair market competition on the merits.  

3. The liability regime of digital services acting as intermediaries 

The scope of the DSA and its liability regime should not cover news content producers, 
press  publications  and  works  of  a  journalistic  nature.  The  news  sector  already  has 
effective  mechanisms  in  place  to  deal  with  content-based  issues.  In  particular,  the 
newspapers  industry  is  subject  to  independent  regulators’  scrutiny  that  set  high 
standards of journalism as well as restrictions above and beyond the law. Therefore, 
the DSA should focus exclusively on online intermediaries. Our comments will focus 
on the following aspects of the liability regime: 

Illegal content: the notice-and-take-down mechanism  

• 
•  Reviewing the ECD liability regime for online intermediaries  
•  Clarifying responsibilities for online platforms  
•  Disinformation as harmful content  

3 Oxford Reuters Institute for the Study of Journalism (2018) The Future of Voice and the Implications for News 
(link) 

News Media Europe – Square de Meeûs 25 – 1000 Brussels – Belgium – BE 0647.900.810 

5 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.1 Illegal content: the notice-and-take-down mechanism  

The experience of news publishers in dealing with illegal content online includes illegal 
advertising, defamatory statements, intellectual property infringements and others, but 
often  focuses  on  copyright  violations,  which we  will  use  as  a  basis  to  illustrate  and 
discuss  a  typical  reporting  procedure  and  the  measures  that  may  consequently  be 
taken. We wish to stress that the DSA should not try to re-write the Copyright Directive 
(EU) 2019/790, but rather address situations unforeseen by the law so far. 

Press  publishers  or  their  collective  management  organisations  regularly  monitor 
whether their content is being illegally reproduced on websites or online intermediaries 
such as social media, search engines, aggregators, etc. Journalists can also contact 
press publishers when their articles are reproduced without consent.  

In such case, press publishers have two options on how to proceed: either contacting 
the  author  of  the  post  directly  (the  alleged  infringer)  or  the  online  intermediary  (the 
host).  

Generally speaking, infringers are genuinely not aware of copyright law and most of 
them will  remove the content upon notification – with or without some persuasion  – 
while only a few will refuse to take action. The situation becomes more complex when 
the unlawful reproduction takes place in closed social media groups (e.g. Facebook, 
WhatsApp, Telegram) since it is difficult to identify the unlawful reproduction of content 
or  the  person  responsible  for  the  group.  Once  the  administrator  is  identified,  press 
publishers are only able to contact the administrator through the  messaging service 
(e.g. Messenger). Yet the message can simply be ignored, which brings an end to the 
procedure.  As more social media groups turn private or closed, i.e. you need to be 
approved as a member to see what is posted within the group, it becomes increasingly 
difficult for rightsholders to monitor illegal reproductions. 

Another  option  is  to  contact  the  online  intermediary.  News  producers  or  their 
representatives  can  send  the  intermediary  a  warning  letter  which  would  typically 
provide detailed information about which laws are being violated, clear  examples of 
violations on the website or the platform, which solutions are available and the steps 
to take to implement these solutions. The warning letter would give the opportunity to 
either  remove  the  content,  conclude  a  license  or  change  the  content  into  a  lawful 
format. When no action is taken, a settlement is sent out.  

Press publishers can also notify illegal content through the online intermediary’s own 
reporting procedure. While information about the reporting procedure is generally fairly 
accessible, the procedure itself typically proves extremely tedious and inefficient, with 
ample scope for improvement. 

News Media Europe – Square de Meeûs 25 – 1000 Brussels – Belgium – BE 0647.900.810 

6 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The experience of news publishers is that reporting procedures are excessively time-
consuming and that by the time they are concluded, illegal content is uploaded multiple 
times and broadly disseminated. Filling in a form for every infringing upload is simply 
impossible. Press publishers could spend  infinite resources filling in complaints and 
yet  only  a  marginal  number  of  infringements  would  be  addressed  on  large  social 
networks.   

Social media must be forced to take more responsibility towards repeating infringers 
and provide a more efficient reporting system to rightsholders. We suggest: 

•  The introduction of precise timeframes to make each step of the notice-and-

action procedure more efficient; 

•  The  obligation  for  the  intermediary  to  actively verify  the  notified  content  and 

quickly follow-up with the flagger; 

•  The  obligation  for  the  online  intermediary  to  notify  users  of  the  decision  to 

remove content with justifications; 

•  Transparent  and  productive  communication  between  the  notifier  and  the 
intermediary with a direct line, in the same time zone as the notifier and in the 
local  language.  We  are  of  the  view  that  platforms  could  be  much  more 
transparent with rightsholders, the same way that users who post illegal content 
are informed on why their posts are removed from a page. 

•  Building up on the recent CJEU case law4, a stay-down obligation, preventing 
reappearance of the illegal content once and for all. The Court ruled that an 
intermediary “can be ordered to remove content identical and equivalent to that 
found  illegal”  and  that  such  injunction  may  produce  effects  “worldwide”.  We 
think this is positive development insofar as the rightsholder would only have 
to  notify  one  illegal  upload  to  have  all  “identical  or  equivalent  infringing 
contents” removed across borders or on all the company’s services.  

To  summarise,  the  notice-and-action  mechanism  deserves  clarification  and  clear 
procedural steps, from the reception of the notification to follow-up communications 
and  decisions  on  removal.  Also,  intermediaries  should  be  bound  by  a  stay-down 
obligation to avoid multiple complaints on the same content.  

Online intermediaries should be obliged to follow procedural steps based on the clear 
principle that failure to do so would result in enhanced liability.  It is in platforms’ own 
interests to act and keep their services free from content that is obviously and by nature 

4 Eva Glawischnig-Piesczek vs Facebook Ireland Limited (Case C-18/18) 

News Media Europe – Square de Meeûs 25 – 1000 Brussels – Belgium – BE 0647.900.810 

7 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
illegal,  such  as  terrorist  content,  child  pornography,  incitement  to  violence,  hate 
speech, etc. This is less obvious for other types of content that become illegal because 
they  are  uploaded  without  the  rightsholders’  authorisation.  In  both  cases,  platforms 
should diligently and swiftly engage in the procedure against illegal content.  

Lastly, while there is merit for the DSA to clarify and harmonise the regime at EU level, 
national authorities should remain competent to enforce illegal content rules. 

3.2 Reviewing the eCommerce Directive liability regime for online 
intermediaries  

While we think that some principles of the eCommerce Directive 2000/31/EC (ECD) 
remain relevant, such as the harmonised liability exemptions, we also believe the DSA 
should  not  shy  away  from  improving  the  liability  framework  to  promote  a  safer  and 
fairer digital space.  

When discussing how such an outcome may be achieved, it is necessary to take due 
consideration for the ban on general monitoring obligations. While the general ban is 
well-founded, it should not be used by platforms to turn a blind eye on illegal content 
circulating on their services.  The Internet of today brings risks that did not exist at the 
time when the ECD was adopted more than twenty years ago. Therefore, it is important 
to  acknowledge  that  a  certain  degree  of  monitoring  obligation  is  desirable  and 
necessary  to  make  platforms  more  accountable  towards  business  partners,  public 
authorities and most importantly the safety of users.  

While  we  believe  that  the  protection  of  fundamental  rights  online  is  crucial  -  an 
argument that our own industry is particularly receptive to - we think that technologies 
and  human  review  working  together  can  provide  the  right  balance  to  content 
moderation  and  should  form  the  basis  for  further  work  in  this  area.  Supporting 
technologies are important in the fight against illegal content  and bring added-value 
even  when human intervention  and oversight  remain relevant  to provide a nuanced 
assessment.  

Second, when it comes to the liability exemptions, the distinction between passive and 
active hosts (Recital 42) is of crucial importance since it determines whether a host 
may benefit from the safe harbour. However, experience shows that the distinction is 
rather unclear and does not encourage platforms to become (pro)active due to the risk 
of not qualifying for the exemptions, and can lead to inconsistent application of the law. 
This  ambiguity  also  makes  it  difficult  for  press  publishers  to  start legal  proceedings 
when they believe there is an online infringement.  Furthermore, we expect that  this 
dichotomy will only become more uncertain as business models evolve. It is therefore 
important that the DSA addresses this issue. 

News Media Europe – Square de Meeûs 25 – 1000 Brussels – Belgium – BE 0647.900.810 

8 

 
 
 
 
 
We  propose  to  clarify  that  an  intermediary  may  be  “active”  whenever  it  performs 
“curation”, meaning, when it plays an active role towards the content it hosts. Curation 
for  instance  happens  when  content  is  presented  in  an  attractive  way,  categorised, 
selected or promoted, and can involve some degree of control over content. Hence 
curation  is  important  because  it  implies  some  degree  of  knowledge  about  content, 
which in turn can determine liability according to the existing framework.  

Having said this, we wish to highlight that it is crucial to distinguish between “curation” 
and “content creation”. Online intermediaries are not content producers even though 
they increasingly curate third party content. To put it simply, social media and editorial 
media operate under different business models, with different purposes, and thus call 
for distinct legal qualifications and regimes.  

An editorial media, such as a press publisher or a news broadcaster, is one that is 
primarily liable for its own content. This includes situations where the editorial media 
publishes and takes responsibility for a third party’s content (e.g. a letter to the editor-
in-chief, an opinion, etc). Concretely, press publishers that have editorial control over 
their own Internet publications do not benefit from the liability exemptions of Article 14 
ECD because they do not act as intermediaries5. Therefore, news media is primarily 
and fully liable for the content it produces. On the other hand, a social media hosts and 
distributes content uploaded by its users: it is already secondarily liable for third party 
content and can benefit from the ECD liability exemptions under certain conditions. 

Now, the distinction becomes more and more blurry as business models evolve on 
both sides. Social media increasingly curates third party content to propose tailored 
pages. While editorial media increasingly introduces User-Generated Content (UGC) 
by  encouraging  readers  and  viewers  to  engage  with  news  rather  than  passively 
consuming it, e.g. when uploading the video of a witnessed event, commenting through 
live chats, etc. However, the business model for social media is essentially based on 
UGC  whereas  editorial  media  incorporates  UGC  as  an  accessory  to  illustrate  or 
comment its own editorial content. The DSA should therefore define a liability regime 
for social media different from that of editorial news media.  

For  practical  reasons,  there  is  strong  merit  in  considering  whether  creating  new 
categories of hosting services, such as “social networks” that are in practice in between 
publishers and distributors, which would be accompanied by a defined and clarified set 
of  legal  responsibilities  and  liability6.  Such  list  should  not  be  prescriptive  but  rather 
welcome new business models and include evolving obligations.   

5 Sotiris Papasavvas v O Fileleftheros Dimosia Etaireia Ltd and Others, CJEU (Case C-291/13): “Consequently, 
since  a  newspaper  publishing  company  which  posts  an  online  version  of  a  newspaper  on  its  website  has,  in 
principle, knowledge about the information which it posts and exercises control over that information, it cannot be 
considered to be an ‘intermediary service provider’ within the  meaning of Articles 12 to 14 of Directive 2000/31, 
whether or not access to that website is free of charge.” para [45] 
6 Schibsted (2019) Report “Ensuring democracy and freedom of speech online – a need for a balanced regulation 
of social networks” (link)  

News Media Europe – Square de Meeûs 25 – 1000 Brussels – Belgium – BE 0647.900.810 

9 

 
 
 
 
 
In any event, it is important that the appropriate online intermediary regime should be 
a  reinforced  by  a  clear  principle  of  secondary  liability.  Under  the  ECD,  online 
intermediaries are subject to a secondary (or limited) liability for the content they do 
not own. This is a good principle. Yet the current regime does not encourage online 
intermediaries to take action against  certain types of  illegal content and experience 
shows that self-regulation so far continues to fall short of expectations. Therefore, we 
suggest  the  DSA  introduces  enhanced  secondary  liability  attached  to  some  duty  of 
care obligations for major platforms.  

3.3 Clarifying responsibilities for online platforms  

In our view, it is important that the DSA becomes an instrument to promote responsible 
actors in the online space. As mentioned, while we agree with the basic principles of 
the eCommerce Directive, what is missing is the notion of due diligence or duty of care. 
In our view, platforms should take reasonable steps to keep users safe and prevent 
harming  other  users  as  a  direct  consequence  of  the  activity  performed  on  their 
services.  Now,  some  online  platforms  often  hide  behind  “the  responsibility  of  their 
users”  instead  of  owning  up  to  their  own  accountability.  This  status  quo  cannot  be 
tolerated for major platforms who could be doing much more. 

In theory whether a platform is big or not, the problems and accountability remain the 
same. But a differentiation based on a threshold system could be put in place  (e.g. 
based on income or number of users) or using existing instruments under competition 
law (e.g. market dominance). For instance, such duty of care could apply to “systemic” 
platforms  that  have  become  so  influential  on  all  aspects  of  life  and  the  economy, 
including culture, creativity, politics, social life and electronic commerce, that they must 
carry  a  special  responsibility  towards  society.  We  further  develop  this  notion  in  the 
“gatekeeper power” section.  

Hosting platforms that are found “systemic” in nature should only benefit from the safe 
harbour rules applicable under Article 14 ECD provided that they meet clear duty of 
care  obligations.  This  means  that  large  platforms  that  are  fundamental  to  the 
architecture of the internet should be bound by special obligations to avoid turning a 
blind  eye  on  illegal  activities  occurring  on  their  services.  For  instance,  business-to-
business  intermediaries  could  be  subject  to  a  “know-your-business-customer”  duty 
requiring identity checks on the basis of official documents (e.g. corporate registration, 
postal  address,  identity  card,  etc)  to  prevent  fake  accounts  or  pirate  websites  from 
prospering. Also, UGC platforms, web browsers, search engines or aggregators, could 
be  bound  by  a  “share-with-care”  obligation,  by  warning  users  to  think  twice  before 
sharing or redirecting users to lawful options. External auditing could serve to verify 
whether such duties have been diligently carried out.  

To summarise, the DSA could build on the existing liability regime by clearly defining 
secondary liability for online intermediaries. For instance, we propose making curation 

News Media Europe – Square de Meeûs 25 – 1000 Brussels – Belgium – BE 0647.900.810 

10 

 
 
an  indicator  that  the  platform  has  knowledge  over  the  substance  of  the  content  to 
determine liability. Systemic platforms would only benefit from the secondary liability 
exemptions provided that they perform special duty of care obligations. Such duty of 
care  obligations  should in  no  circumstance  apply  to  news  publishers  which already 
follow thorough editorial processes and assume  clearly defined legal responsibilities 
for the nature of their content. As such, intermediaries should also not interfere with 
editorial content integrity and media independence by exercising duty of care or other 
standards in relation to professional news content. Otherwise, online intermediaries’ 
new  compliance  practices  and  algorithms  risk  delisting,  deranking  or  removing 
publishers’ content. 

3.4 Disinformation as harmful content 

The DSA is the opportunity to clarify the rules applicable to online intermediaries in the 
fight  against  disinformation.  However,  such  rules  must  respect  media  freedom  and 
fundamental rights such as access to information and freedom of expression. Hence, 
we believe that the DSA should not regulate content but rather encourage platforms to  
put measures in place to promote trustful sources, become more accountable to the 
public,  work  with  independent  fact  checkers,  and  demonetise  disinformation  by 
removing their ability to profit from advertising. Currently, platforms are not sufficiently 
incentivised to put such measures in place.  

For instance, there can be a significant financial incentive to fabricate and disseminate 
fake  news,  as  content  published  online  can  benefit  from  advertising  revenue. 
Producers of fake news notably compete with trusted media providers for the attention 
of readers and for advertising revenues.  Therefore, professional journalistic content 
and trusted sources could be put more in the spotlight to give users better access to 
reliable information.  

We  suggest  the  DSA  imposes  algorithmic  transparency  rules  on  hosting  service 
providers to ensure the distribution of a diversity of opinions and variety of contents 
online. In particular, hosting service providers should be subject to accountability rules 
towards  news  producers  with  regards  to  the  monetization  and  distribution  of  their 
content.  A  functioning  Digital  Single  Market  should  ensure  that  quality  content, 
especially professional journalism, is given more prominence and attracts more user 
traffic than illegal or harmful content.  

Fact-checking UGC can be a solution in the fight against disinformation while avoiding 
over-removal. However, it is important to preserve the integrity of professional news 
media  content  that  has  already  been  fact-checked  and  subject  to  strict  journalistic 
guidelines. In other words, responsibility should never extend to the review of editorial 
content  to  respect  media  independence  and  freedom.  Nor  should  platforms’  own 
standards result in the removal or otherwise undermining of the integrity of journalistic 

News Media Europe – Square de Meeûs 25 – 1000 Brussels – Belgium – BE 0647.900.810 

11 

 
 
 
 
 
content. Our industry already has in place national press complaint systems to deal 
with concerns associated with professionally edited news content. 

Also,  the  decision  as  to  whether  content  is  “acceptable”  should  not  be  left  to  tech 
companies’ private policies or community standards. One issue is that disinformation 
may be subject to different definitions from one Member State to another and such 
fragmentation can lead to legal uncertainty. In our view, EU guidance could clarify what 
can  constitute  “disinformation”,  e.g.  the  notion  of  “intention”  to  differentiate  an 
inaccurate  statement  from  conscious  misinformation,  the  exclusion  of  parody  and 
satire to preserve media freedom, or generally the exclusion of any definition that could 
be used as a justification for legal restraints on news media publishers’ content, which 
is already subject to national laws and the industry’s own codes of conduct. 

That said, decisions related to UGC should be taken in line with cultural differences 
and  national  rules  for  freedom  of  speech.  Therefore,  regulatory  scrutiny  and 
enforcement on disinformation should for now be left to national authorities. However, 
if self-regulatory efforts continue to fall short of expectations, the natural way forward 
would be additional intervention possibly in the form of co-regulation. Yet there remains 
a question mark as to whether this would be best achieved at EU or national level. In 
any event, improved coordination between Member States would yield better results.  

4. The gatekeeper power of online platforms  

News  organisations  in  Europe,  whether  publishers,  radio  or  tv  broadcasters,  must 
develop a strong and sustainable online presence in order to fulfil their mission and 
commercial  objectives,  whether  through  the  development  of  own  tools  or  through 
partnerships with third-party commercial entities.  

In practice, the size of companies involved in the production and distribution of news 
and the ways in which news consumption is evolving means that publishers very often 
have to work with large online platforms who, by virtue of market structures, have both 
the  ability  and  incentive  to  engage  in  anti-competitive  practices  that  distort 
competition7.  

This  observation  relates  mainly  but  not  exclusively  to  large  and  powerful  platform 
operators  that  have  become  “systemic”  digital  gatekeepers,  who  are  unavoidable 
partners and control access to key markets. Such gatekeepers are able to determine 
the trading conditions for third parties, and to behave independently of other actors in 
the  online  marketplace  due  to  the  market  power  afforded  to  them  by  their  strategic 
position as intermediaries.   

7 J. Crémer, Y-A. de Montjoye and H. Schweitzer (2018) Report on “Competition policy for the digital era” (link) 

News Media Europe – Square de Meeûs 25 – 1000 Brussels – Belgium – BE 0647.900.810 

12 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
As such, large platforms can control access to audiences, monetisation tools, data and 
more.  Such  platforms  are  present  across a  range  of  markets  of  key  importance  for 
news  companies,  including  search,  social  networks,  app  stores,  over-the-top 
communications services, and content aggregators, which enables them to leverage 
their market power into neighbouring markets to the detriment of existing and potential 
competitors, including news publishers at large.  

EU  competition  law  is  inherently  flexible  enough  to  address  many  of  the  concerns 
shared by the news media. Yet, it is also by itself insufficient to solve all of the problems 
identified, and complementary regulation is therefore required in the form of ex-ante 
regulation89. Below, we explore a number of recurrent areas of concern identified by 
our industry over the past years, and also provide some case studies, which we believe 
should inform EU policy makers, across a non-exhaustive range of issues including: 

•  Challenges with digital gatekeepers 
•  Disintermediation problems 
•  Competition concerns of news publishers in online advertising  
•  Lack of transparency in the ad-tech supply chain  
•  Problems with bargaining power in digital markets 
•  Dealing with imbalances in bargaining power 

4.1 Challenges with digital gatekeepers 

News publishers are heavily reliant on a few large and powerful intermediaries to do 
business, notably Google and Facebook, across a number of core business functions 
such  as  content  licensing  and  distribution,  audience  and  advertisement  analytics, 
advertising, and other supporting technology services.  

The relationship with these platforms is a complicated one, as previously highlighted 
in our contribution, since they both offer services used by publishers but also compete 
with them for the same revenue, while controlling the access to key markets as well as 
the rules that govern such access.  

These  specific  structural  market  conditions,  combined  with  the  use  of  commercial 
practices  by  platforms  that  raise  concerns  of  an  anti-competitive  nature,  have 
increasingly  resulted  in  discussions  revolving  around  the  concept  of  “digital 
gatekeepers”.  

We  believe  this  problem  identification  accurately  captures  the  relevant  market 
dynamics at play, especially when it comes to the understanding that certain platforms 

8 Digital Competition Expert Panel chaired by J. Furman (2019) Unlocking Digital Competition (link) 
9 Stigler Center Committee on Digital Platforms (2019) Final Report and Policy brief on Digital Platforms (link) 

News Media Europe – Square de Meeûs 25 – 1000 Brussels – Belgium – BE 0647.900.810 

13 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
can also assume a “systemic” role in the marketplace, without necessarily having a 
“dominant” position in the market within the meaning of EU competition law.  

Digital gatekeepers are of particular concern to news publishers when they build their 
activities on a strategic market position. This is because such strategic positions in the 
market  may  not  always  satisfy  the  conditions  for  dominance  that  has  traditionally 
guided work in the field of EU competition law. In such cases, competition authorities 
have very limited powers to prevent market conduct that can still result in significant 
harm for the marketplace and consumers.  

It  is  furthermore  important  that  the  role  of  certain  large  platforms  be  recognised  as 
“systemic”  in  their  role  across  a  variety  of  regulatory  purposes,  as  the  European 
Commission acknowledged in its Communication on Shaping Europe’s Digital Future, 
and  regulators  should  not  shy  away  from  understating  this  reality10.  Such  systemic 
platforms  essentially  control  access  to  large  markets  that  can  hardly  be  ignored  by 
smaller third-party operators, creating an uneven relationship of dependency, and can 
also have significant broader social, political and cultural implications for society.  

In  a  stricter  economic  sense,  systemic  platforms  constitute  unavoidable  partners, 
which  is  the  experience  that  news  publishers  have  in  relation  to  several  of  the  big 
technology firms such as Google, Facebook and Apple. As such, they can and should 
in  our  view  also  be  seen  as  systemic  gatekeepers.  The  economic  model  of  these 
platform operators means that much of the content on the internet is now accessed via 
their  platforms,  including  news  and  journalistic  content,  and  it  is  clear  that  a  major 
relationship of dependency has developed over time.  

The  problem  of  excessive  dependency  has  now  reached  a  critical  juncture  that  is 
exacerbated  by  the  economic  models  of  certain  intermediation  platforms  which 
continue to leverage their strategic position in the market to forcibly disintermediate 
other industries. In practice, certain systemic gatekeepers are now largely able to set 
the terms and conditions that govern the distribution and accessing of news content 
via  their  platforms  independently  of  what  other  third-party  commercial  partners  do, 
demonstrating their ability to behave independently of other market participants and 
competitors.  

This dynamic is particularly acute and most visible when it comes to access to data-
related issues, with the prevailing concern of news publishers being the phenomenon 
of  data  disintermediation.  Both  Google  and  Facebook  are  able  to  strong  arm  news 
publishers through their respective publishing tools, Google Accelerated Mobile Pages 
“AMP” and Facebook Instant Articles into giving up any rights on user data or on the 
data that results from their own commercial activities to the benefit of the closed data 
ecosystems or walled-gardens that these digital gatekeepers are able to thus reinforce.  

10 European Commission (2020) Communication on “Shaping Europe’s Digital Future” (link) 

News Media Europe – Square de Meeûs 25 – 1000 Brussels – Belgium – BE 0647.900.810 

14 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This  puts  news  publishers  in  a  difficult  position  in  relation  to  systemic  gatekeepers 
since publishers cannot afford to forego the benefits of having access to the market 
and user base that these platform operators can provide access to, in order to retain 
an economically sound footing in the marketplace. News publishers are in this sense 
coerced to accept unenviable trading conditions and are as such locked in the closed 
platform ecosystems that systemic gatekeepers develop, alongside their userbase and 
corresponding data space.  

Looking to the not so distant future, the rise of smart speakers, voice assistants and 
similar  audio-based  technologies,  raise  significant  concerns  about  a  handful  of 
companies  becoming  gatekeepers  at  the  centre  of  much  regulatory  debate.  Such 
internet-of-things devices are likely to rapidly grow to control access to key markets 
and become unavoidable partners, and the way in which the underlying search function 
of such devices respond to queries will have a major impact on the media sector11.  

Overall, it is clear to us that there are several ways in which gatekeepers can be looked 
at and defined. Most importantly for the news industry, is the recognition that certain 
large  platforms  in  particular  take  on  a  systemic  character  in  their  importance  as 
commercial partners, and as such become “unavoidable partners”. They are effectively 
gatekeepers to users, data, and entire markets.  

The  notion  of  gatekeepers  is  not  a  notion  that  should  be  restricted  by  existing  EU 
competition  law  constructs,  and  should  instead  be  flexible  to  address  the  current 
shortcoming  of  the  competition  framework.  The  importance  of  specific  criteria  in 
determining  which  platforms  should  qualify  as  “gatekeepers”,  and  consequently  be 
included in the scope of a stronger, ex-ante framework for large platforms, should be 
further investigated in the framework of an impact assessment study.  

4.2 Disintermediation problems 

As the digital economy evolves, many new online platforms that act as intermediaries 
emerge  and  bring  valuable  and  innovative  services  to  the  marketplace.  That  is  in 
principle a positive and welcome development that can drive new, mutually beneficial 
commercial partnerships and bring more choice for consumers.  

However, when the market power of intermediaries or their strategic market position is 
used to forcibly impose or exacerbate disintermediation effects at the expense of the 
legitimate  activities  of  third-party  businesses,  with  the  effect  of  coercing  such 
businesses  into  accepting  otherwise  unacceptable  terms  and  conditions,  such 
intermediaries raise strong concerns about harmful anti-competitive behaviour.  

11 Oxford Reuters Institute for the Study of Journalism (2018) The Future of Voice and the Implications for News 
(link) 

News Media Europe – Square de Meeûs 25 – 1000 Brussels – Belgium – BE 0647.900.810 

15 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Disintermediation  can  take  many  forms  and  gatekeeping  platforms  such  as  Google 
and  Facebook  have  been  central  to  the  harmful  disintermediation  process  that  has 
taken place between news publishers and their audiences over the past 20 years. This 
development  is  highly  regrettable  since  intermediation  by  online  platforms  is  not 
inherently harmful and could in theory be harnessed to drive healthy competition in 
digital markets.  

Platforms such as Google and Facebook go to great lengths to control the interfaces 
through  which  news  content  is  delivered  on  their  platforms  and  to  claim  exclusive 
ownership  of  users  and  client  relationships.  They  also  further  disintermediate  the 
advertising  side  of  the  market  as  well  as  audiences,  and  by  extension  they  also 
disintermediate publishers from data that is critical to the development of sustainable 
digital business models.  

Disintermediation problems related to data are particularly urgent to address since data 
serves  not  only  as  input  for  key  business  processes,  but  for  innovation,  for  the 
development of new products and services, and for spotting emerging market trends. 
On a broader level, data allows businesses to better engage with their consumers and 
audiences and enables digital business models to thrive. This is particularly relevant 
when considering the need to attract paying customers in the form of subscribers. In 
practice, publishers need to be able to access data if they are to be able to offer good 
services and to compete with large platforms.  

News  publishers  may  try  to  bypass  the  data  ecosystems  of  large  platforms  and  to 
develop their own capabilities as competitors, by creating first party data spaces which 
can  have  multiple purposes.  When  that  is  possible,  more  publishing,  analytical and 
trading functions can be brought in house and allow for companies to further develop 
and diversify their business models and strategic capabilities through organic growth. 

This approach, however, can only succeed if  digital platforms do not interfere with the 
ability  of  publishers  to  collect  and  process  data  associated  with  their  products  and 
audiences,  and  if  they  do  not  artificially  restrict  the  right  of  legitimate  businesses 
operating on their platforms to collect and process that data. This problem posed by 
data disintermediation can be illustrated through several industry products belonging 
to Google, Apple and Facebook, amongst others.  

In the case of Apple’s App Store, for example, Apple claims to have ownership of the 
relationship  with  users  of  apps  developed  by  third  party  developers  that  are  made 
available on its App Store platform. Whereas many news publishers spend significant 
amounts of time and effort to develop apps to better engage with audiences, and in a 

News Media Europe – Square de Meeûs 25 – 1000 Brussels – Belgium – BE 0647.900.810 

16 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
spirit of good faith, publishers are only given little to no access to user data because 
Apple considers that it owns the said data12.  

Apple considers that it owns the said data because the terms and conditions governing 
the use of the App Store for app developers stipulate that Apple is the contractual party 
with whom end-users of apps enter into an agreement. The Commission’s decision to 
open  a  formal  probe  into  the  App  Store  and  the  number  of  complaints  concerning 
Apple’s policy is testament to the seriousness of the concerns raised over time by such 
practices.  

It needs to be assessed whether the imposition of terms by platforms such as Apple 
that systematically disintermediate data and/or seek to limit access to data, constitute 
an abuse of dominance, and it is equally necessary to assess whether such terms can 
be  considered  unfair  and anti-competitive  in  light  of  this.  Yet  such  issues  may also 
arise in situations where a given platform may not be dominant per se in a strict sense, 
but instead may still be regarded as a digital gatekeeper with important “intermediary 
power”.  

Here, the Spotify-Apple anti-trust investigation of the European Commission may prove 
to be a case in point. Apple claims that it is not dominant in any market, and instead 
faces intense competition in a range of markets such as music, streaming, phones, 
laptops, etc.  

On the other hand, if one follows the logic of the 2018 Android decision13, it could be 
argued that Apple faces no competition in app stores for Apple’s iOS, and that Apple 
is therefore the default monopolist in this market and thus holds a dominant position, 
and  that  its  App  Store  rules  are  therefore  capable  of  producing  exclusionary  and 
exploitative effects on app developers at large.  

The  case  goes  to  demonstrate  how  a  finding  of  dominance,  which  could  have  a 
decisive  impact  on  the  finding  of  whether  certain  practices  are  abusive,  anti-
competitive and harmful under the current regulatory framework, can vary in outcome 
as  a  function  of  the  market  definition  process.  Regardless  of  the  outcome  of  this 
particular case, it follows that it is conceivable that more situations may arise whereby 
a firm may not be necessarily dominant because of the definition of the relevant market 
but  could  still  be  engaged  in  practices  with  harmful  effects  on  the  market  and 
consumers that warrant some form of intervention.  

For  instance,  Apple  recently  announced  that  the  newest  iteration  of  its  operating 
system “iOS 14” for its desktop and mobile devices will include a new feature: when 
clicking  on  news  links,  Apple  News+  subscribers,  instead  of  being  redirected  to 

12 The Netherlands Authority for Consumers & Markets (2019) Market study into mobile app stores (link) 
13 European Commission (2018) Press Release “Commission fines Google €4.34 billion for illegal practices 
regarding Android mobile devices to strengthen dominance of Google's search engine” (link) 

News Media Europe – Square de Meeûs 25 – 1000 Brussels – Belgium – BE 0647.900.810 

17 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
publishers’ websites, will be directed to the Apple News + app (this would apply when 
news publishers are part of the Apple News+ licensing programme)14. 

This effectively amounts to harmful form of data disintermediation which will keep users 
in  the  Apple  closed  data  ecosystem  to  the  detriment  of  publishers  who  will 
consequently loose access to valuable data. In this scenario, Apple is leveraging its 
position  as  a  gatekeeper,  without  necessarily  doing  so  on  the  basis  of  a  dominant 
market position. 

App stores, in general, also raise a broader question going forward about who should 
be considered the owner of data, and by extension who should have the legitimate 
right to access data held by intermediaries. In many cases, such data is essential so 
that the right level of service can be provided to users and so that businesses may 
develop their own capabilities and digital business models. Cutting off third parties from 
accessing such data therefore does not seem fair or legitimate.  

In  fact,  it  appears  counterintuitive  that  intermediary  platforms  rather  than  app 
developers should own and control access to such key data. When a user navigates 
the app of a news publisher and benefits from journalistic content on it, it is clear the 
user is doing so primarily in a capacity as a consumer of a product or service supplied 
by the app developer. In that case, the fact the content is accessed via, for example, 
either an app store belonging to Apple or Google, is merely coincidental.  

We therefore believe that the DSA should impose a legitimate data access obligation 
on platforms acting as gatekeepers towards third-party commercial partners operating 
on their platform. This would go a long way towards balancing competition in the long-
term, in ways that competition policy cannot address, especially when non-dominant 
firms are concerned, and give recognition to legitimate online business models. Such 
an obligation should explicitly include app stores in its scope.  

Doing  so  would  require  a  competent  regulator  to  have  both  powers  to  collect 
information from companies involved in data disintermediation, but also to be able to 
impose tailor-made remedies to specific market participants going forward.  

4.3 Competition concerns of news publishers in online advertising 

Industry experts refer to the online advertisement market as “the duopoly” because of 
the  overwhelming  market  dominance  of  Google  and  Facebook,  respectively  in  the 
search  and  display/non-search  markets.  The  high  levels  of  concentration  in  these 
markets  put  at  significant  risk  the  economic  sustainability  of  present  and  potential 

14 TechCrunch (2020) iOS 14 redirects web links from News+ publishers directly to the Apple News app (link) 

News Media Europe – Square de Meeûs 25 – 1000 Brussels – Belgium – BE 0647.900.810 

18 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
future business models for news organisations, and media more broadly speaking, that 
rely on advertising15. 

In  practice,  this  is  reflected  by  the  very  limited  share  of  revenues  derived  from  the 
selling of advertising space that contribute towards the bottom line of publishers, and 
disproportionately  high  share  of  profits  that  are  absorbed  by  various  advertising 
technology companies along the value chain.  

There is no comprehensive and definitive study identifying across markets the typical 
or average split and distribution of revenues. But the existing literature and anecdotal 
evidence,  probably  more  on  the  optimistic  side  of  the  discussion,  point  to  news 
publishers  struggling  in  most  cases  to  achieve  even  half  every  1  EUR  spent  by 
advertisers at the other end of the supply chain. This is often referred to as the so-
called “ad tech tax” that ultimately remains difficult to explain and which we elaborate 
on in the following section.  

Overall,  it  is  concerning  to  observe  the  continued  trend  and  paradox  of  increased 
popularity and monetisation of digital media content, in particular as regards journalistic 
content, while the financial gains derived from that very content, or the proportion of 
those profits that goes back to benefit content producers, remains very limited. In this 
sense,  the  main  beneficiaries  of  content  monetisation  through  advertising  are  now 
large and powerful online platforms which intermediate, distribute and monetise third-
party content.  

It is of particular concern for the news industry that certain platforms not only distribute 
news content, but also compete for advertising revenue with news organisations while 
supplying  them  with  advertising  technology-related  services.  This  can  contribute  to 
exacerbating the gatekeeper relationship between large platforms and news publishers 
and in this sense, large platforms may have become unavoidable partners to an even 
greater extent which enables them to impose unenviable terms and conditions. 

In addition, we note that several platforms increasingly compete with news publishers 
for the provision of news-related products and services, as evidenced by the growing 
number  of  journalists  that  these  platforms  are  hiring  to  support  their  product 
development  teams.  This  is  a  testament  to  their  intent  to  move  into  news-related 
neighbouring markets, in a bid to extract further value from publishers, possibly through 
greater disintermediation.  

As such, competition with news publishers no longer only takes place along the lines 
of  advertising  revenues.  Google,  Facebook  and  Apple  all  have  such  products  (e.g. 
Google News, Google Discovery, Google Accelerated Mobile Pages “AMP”, Google 
Subscribe, Google Assistant, Facebook Instant Articles, Facebook News Tab, Apple 

15 Competition and Markets Authority (2020) Online platforms and digital advertising report (link)  

News Media Europe – Square de Meeûs 25 – 1000 Brussels – Belgium – BE 0647.900.810 

19 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
News+), with varying degrees of editorial control being applied to the content itself. Of 
particular concern is the rise of voice assistants from various technology companies, 
who would provide voice-based news aggregation services.  

Another  issue  that  deserves  particular  importance  from  the  perspective  of  online 
advertising, is the shift that internet browsers are forcing through the phasing out of 
third-party  cookies,  which  are  fundamentally  essential  to  the  ways  in  which  digital 
advertising  companies  currently  operate,  except  for  Google  who  is  largely  able  to 
provide advertising services on a first-party basis due to the vast swathes of data it has 
accumulated over time through its many products and services. 

This  is  why  the  announced  phasing  out  of  third-party  cookies  by  Google by  202216 
through  the  Google  Chrome  internet  browser  raises  strong  concerns  about  the 
exclusionary effects it would have on the rest of the online advertising industry. This is 
of  particular  concern  when  one  considers  that  Google  already  holds  a  dominant 
position both in the market for web browsers and the online advertising market, which 
could as a result become further entrenched.  

Google has justified its decision to phase out third-party cookies as informed by privacy 
concerns, following similar moves by Mozilla’s Firefox and Apple’s Safari browsers. 
Yet, it seems that eliminating third-party cookies only, if anything, maintains the ability 
of  companies  such  as  Google  and  Facebook  to  track  users,  while  preventing  their 
competitors  in  the  advertising  sector  from  doing  the  same,  thus  strengthening  their 
position as gatekeepers. In practice, it will become harder for other digital advertising 
companies  to  conduct  their  activities  such  as  browser-based  targeting,  cross-site 
tracking,  frequency  capping  and  retargeting,  which  are  essential  parameters  of 
competition.  

Indeed, the move would also not affect the quantity and depth of tracking that Google 
itself  would  continue  to  conduct,  and  therefore  raises  important  questions  about 
whether  this  decision  is  really  motivated  by  privacy  concerns,  or  by  abusive  anti-
competitive  behaviour  with  clear  exclusionary  effects  on  competitors,  since  unlike 
Mozilla and Apple, Google has a clearly dominant position and important market power 
in browsers that it can leverage in the online advertising market.  

Addressing  the  concerns  raised  in  relation  to  online  advertising  would  require  a 
competent  regulator  to  have  both  powers  to  collect  information  from  companies 
involved in online advertising, but also to be able to impose tailor-made remedies to 
one or several market participants going forward.  

16 Google Chrome Blogpost (2020) Building a more private web: a parth towards making third party cookies 
obsolete (link)  

News Media Europe – Square de Meeûs 25 – 1000 Brussels – Belgium – BE 0647.900.810 

20 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4.4 Lack of transparency in the ad-tech supply chain  

Transparency in the marketplace is a basic requisite for the development of a healthy 
competitive environment. Unfortunately, transparency is too often lacking the case in 
the ad-tech ecosystem and it is clear to us that much more can be done to improve 
transparency  to  the  benefit  of  all  participants  involved,  businesses  and  consumers 
alike17.  

It was hoped that the online advertising supply chain’s overall transparency situation 
would improve from a data protection point of view with the  General Data Protection 
Regulation (EU) 2016/679 (GDPR), but that has not consistently been the case across 
the entire advertising ecosystem.  

Indeed, Google has been able to exploit the GDPR to its own advantage to entrench 
its market position by offering to deliver all advertising technology services in the ad 
tech  stack  while  also  refusing  to  share  data  with  publishers,  preventing  them  from 
effectively competing and developing their own capabilities. In doing so, it has also 
become  clear  that  the  data  protection  standards  applied  by  Google  for  internal 
purposes,  as  opposed  to  in  relation  to  data  sharing  with  third  parties,  are  by 
comparison less restrictive. 

Furthermore,  it  has  become  clear  that  in  addition  to  issues  associated  with  data 
protection, there are also broader and more basic transparency concerns that persist 
as regards auction mechanisms and bidding processes, matching functions, pricing, 
hidden fees, remuneration of intermediaries, as well as the wider competitive process.  

A  recent  study  by  PwC  UK  suggests  that  15%  of  every  British  Pound  spent  by 
advertisers “disappear” in the supply chain and cannot be accounted for, a situation 
which in our understanding reflects the market reality in other parts of Europe as well18. 
It follows that there are legitimate questions and concerns about the way in which parts 
of the ad tech ecosystem work. 

Shedding  light  on  the  competitive  process  is  complicated  because  of  the  difficulty 
involved in gathering the information necessary to make a good assessment of the 
landscape. It is notoriously difficult to map out the precise scope of activity of firms 
involved in online advertising intermediation at technical level alongside market shares, 
and how such parameters may reflect different competitive processes.  

In this sense, greater transparency across the industry, mandated through regulation, 
should be seriously considered as a way of ensuring that news publishers can obtain 
a  better  deal  in  the  online  advertising  market.  This  could  notably  be  achieved  by 

17 Algoware (2019) An overview of the Programmatic Advertising Ecosystem: Opportunities and Challenges (link) 
18 PricewaterhouseCoopers (2020) ISBA Programmatic Supply Chain Transparency Study (link)  

News Media Europe – Square de Meeûs 25 – 1000 Brussels – Belgium – BE 0647.900.810 

21 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
mandating the development of a transparent, industry-wide standardised process of 
billing and receipt for ad tech services.  

Yet, this  would remain insufficient to address the current concerns shared by news 
publishers and other parts of the advertising ecosystem. When discussing the lack of 
transparency  in  ad-tech,  it  is  also  important  to  discuss  the  role  of  the  Google 
advertising machinery specifically, since it plays such an important role throughout the 
entire supply chain from picking the relevant ads, to placing them and measuring their 
effectiveness on publishers’ websites.  

As the European Commission recently noted as part the Google-Fitbit merger review 
procedure19, Google is already dominant in online search advertising, it holds a strong 
market position in online display advertising and, importantly for this discussion, it also 
holds a strong market position in the supply of ad tech services.  

Because  Google’s  market  power  across  these  key  online  advertising  markets  is  so 
strong,  it  is  equally  concerning  to  observe  the  absence  of  full  transparency  and 
disclosure on how it determines its commercial offerings and how they may artificially 
deflate  the  bottom  line  of  commercial  partners  through  higher  prices  that  harm 
business users and consumers.  

It  is  commonplace  for  industry  commentators  to  refer  to  the  Google  advertising 
ecosystem as a “black box”20, where advertisers do not know why they are paying a 
certain price to put out their ads and do not know whether they are getting the best 
value for their money, and vice versa when it comes to online publishers.  

Central to this concern is the realisation that Google operates with conflicts of interest 
as it is significantly active both on the sell and buy-side of the advertising market, with 
a strong position at each stage of the value chain21. On the basis of its uniquely strong 
market  power  in  advertising,  Google  is  able  to  charge  significantly  higher  prices  to 
advertisers than its competitors.  

In this sense, Google has the ability and incentive to exploit its position on both sides 
of the market by engaging in exclusionary conduct through self-preferencing. In doing 
so, Google is able to leverage its strong position to make it harder for third parties to 
compete  on  the  merits.  Google’s  significant  data  advantage  and  the  absence  of 
meaningful competition in search advertising, from where Google leveraged its strong 
market position to enter the open display market, only aggravate this concern.  

19 European Commission (2020) Press Release “Mergers: Commission opens in-depth investigation into the 
proposed acquisition of Fitbit by Google” (link)  
20 New York Times (2019) The Online Ad World Is Murky. A Group of Companies Wants to Fix That. (link) 
21 Competition and Markets Authority (2020) Online platforms and digital advertising report (link) 

News Media Europe – Square de Meeûs 25 – 1000 Brussels – Belgium – BE 0647.900.810 

22 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This creates several risks for rivals such as anti-competitive tying/bundling and a lack 
of interoperability. This can be exemplified with the merger of Google’s “Double Click 
for Publishers DFP” (Ad server) and “Ad Exchange AdX” (supply-side platform and ad 
exchange) products into “Google Ad Manager” in 2018.  

At its very core, Google’s online advertising business is about the real-time electronic 
buying and selling of ads and advertising space through an advertising exchange. In 
essence, this business replicates the structure of traded financial markets, except that 
in Google’s case, it is a single company that simultaneously operates the leading trade 
venue and the leading buyers and sellers. Google therefore engages in market conduct 
that would in other electronic trading markets be prohibited by law22. The status quo 
amounts to having leading banks running the most important stock exchanges. 

It  is  therefore  also  essential,  in  addition  to  developing  more  transparent  billing  and 
receipting,  to  further  investigate  the  online  advertising  value  chain  and  Google’s 
multiple roles thereof to determine if it is abusing its position as dominant firm and a 
systemic gatekeeper, and whether some form of structural separation or prohibition to 
be active on both the buy and sell sides of the market is consequently necessary to 
ensure the good functioning of the market.  

This would require a competent regulator to have both powers to collect information 
from companies involved in the ad-tech ecosystem, but also to be able to impose tailor-
made remedies to one or several market participants going forward.  

4.5 Problems with bargaining power in digital markets 

One of the key characteristics of the difficult relationship between digital gatekeepers 
and  news  publishers  is  the  fundamental  imbalance  in  bargaining  power  that 
consistently prevents third parties from securing better trading condition and which, by 
extension, enable gatekeepers to operate independently of the rest of the marketplace. 

Typically, this is reflected in the unilateral imposition of terms and conditions that third 
parties are coerced into accepting due to the gatekeeping role of platforms on which 
they rely and depend on to do business. A subsequent issue is that such terms and 
conditions  are  not  always  contestable  since  they  may  not  necessarily  constitute  an 
anti-competitive practice with harmful effects within the meaning of EU competition law.  

The concern that imbalances in negotiation power highlight between third parties and 
platforms are already serious and are likely to become worse with time unless policy 
intervention is carried out, as the European Commission rightly acknowledged in its 
preparatory work ahead of the Platform-to-Business Regulation (EU) 2019/115023.  

22 D. Srinivasan (2020) Why Google Dominates Advertising Markets (link) 
23 European Commission ((2018) Impact Assessment of the Platforms-to-Business Regulation Proposal (link) 

News Media Europe – Square de Meeûs 25 – 1000 Brussels – Belgium – BE 0647.900.810 

23 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
In particular, the case of bargaining power of news publishers needs to be considered 
in  relation  to  Google,  Facebook  and  Apple  who  should  be  seen  as  key  digital 
gatekeepers notably but not exclusively because they constitute “unavoidable trading 
partners”24.  

This  uneven  relationship  can  be  illustrated  with  several  problems  that  publishers 
regularly refer to when discussing the issue of bargaining power, and which reflect to 
varying degrees the ability of gatekeepers to leverage their market power to entrench 
their own position in the marketplace. 

For example, these gatekeepers can make sudden and unexplained changes to their 
basic search (or similar) algorithms, which can have an important, adverse impact on 
the  web  traffic  of  news  publishers  and  on  their  financial  performance  and  ability  to 
develop their data capabilities in the longer-term. Repeated efforts to address this issue 
directly with these companies have yielded little to no attention at all to this ongoing 
problem. In this area, it is clear that additional rules of conduct of business rules are 
needed  to  ensure  more  predictability  for  businesses  subject  to  rankings  and  other 
forms  of  indexation.  In  this  respect,  the  rules  in  Art.  5  of  the  Platform-to-Business 
Regulation (EU) 2019/1150 on rankings under are necessary but not sufficient.  

Increased algorithmic transparency should also serve the purpose of shedding light on 
the extent to which the revenues of platforms are linked to third-party media content. 
That in turn should help establish an equitable distribution of revenue between content 
producers and intermediaries.  

Another  important  area  of  concern  is  the  unilateral  development  and  imposition  of 
content delivery formats and standards on gatekeeping platforms, such as Google’s 
Accelerated Mobile Pages “AMP” and Facebook’s Instant Articles “IA”25. Google’s AMP 
format has in particular also raised significant concerns in the broader open internet 
community26.  

For  news  publishers,  the  AMP  standard  is  concerning  because  refusing  to  use  it 
basically results in lower rankings in search and exclusion from news carousels found 
in the Google News and Google Discover products. As such, it amounts to exclusionary 
conduct. Furthermore, the AMP format also means that content is hosted and served 
directly via Google’s own proprietary servers and domains which means that users are 
kept within the Google ecosystem or walled-garden which reinforces its own market 
position.  

24 P. Alexiadis and A. de Streel (2020) EUI Working Papers: Designing an EU Intervention Standard for Digital 
Platforms (link) 
25 Columbia Journalism Review (2018) Google’s new hands-off approach to AMP fails to satisfy its critics (link)  
26 AMPletter.org (2018) A letter about Google AMP (link) 

News Media Europe – Square de Meeûs 25 – 1000 Brussels – Belgium – BE 0647.900.810 

24 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This creates several disadvantages for news publishers such as making it harder to 
build direct relationships with audiences, reducing the subscription conversion rates, 
limiting the use of interactives features in articles, damaging advertising revenues for 
publishers, and preventing the collection and processing of user data.  

The AMP standard further comes with onerous terms and conditions that grant Google 
excessively broad present and future rights over content which would, in the absence 
of  an  imbalance  in  bargaining  power,  otherwise  be  rejected  as  unfair.  These  terms 
form in our view the basis for possible exploitative abuses.  

Concerns broadly similar to Google’s AMP exist in respect of Facebook’s sister product 
“Instant Articles”. With the development of a Facebook “News Tab” product, and its 
expected roll out in Europe this year or next, there are growing concerns that Facebook 
may  coerce  publishers  into  adopting  the  content  delivery  format  standard  by 
developing  search  rankings  that  penalise  publishers  that  do  not  make  use  of  it, 
resulting in exclusionary conduct similar to Google with AMP and the Google News 
and Google Discovery products.  

As in the case of changing algorithms, both Google and Facebook have shown very 
little interest in sitting at the table with news publishers to discuss concerns associated 
with the AMP and IA products, which illustrates the problem of bargaining power that 
publishers face. For large gatekeeping platforms like Google and Facebook, it does 
not matter if a few publishers refuse or reject their products and terms and conditions 
at an important cost whereas the opposite is true for publishers who are dependent on 
fair access to those markets to develop a strong and sustainable digital presence.  

A more recent illustration of this same problem can be observed in the ongoing dispute 
involving Google and French news publishers in relation to the implementation of the 
Copyright Directive (EU) 2019/790, which affords news publishers a new neighbouring 
right which entitles them to remuneration for the exploitation of their content.  

This dispute, which we expected will be replicated in other Member States and beyond 
globally,  as  evidenced  by  recent  developments  in  Australia27,  demonstrates  the 
problematic nature of Google’s bargaining power in relation to news publishers, raising 
important concerns from the perspective of competition law and provisions against the 
abuse of dominant positions.  

Google is currently able to leverage is market power and far superior bargaining power 
to prevent the application of Article 15 of the new Copyright Directive (EU) 2019/790. 
The French competition authority found in its preliminary decision28 that Google has 
potentially  abused  its  dominant  position  in  the  search  market  by  offering  news 

27 Financial Times (2020) Google says Australian news rule threatens free search services (link)  
28 Autorité de la Concurrence (2020) Press Release “Related rights: the Autorité has granted requests for urgent 
interim measures presented by press publishers and the news agency AFP (Agence France Presse).” (link) 

News Media Europe – Square de Meeûs 25 – 1000 Brussels – Belgium – BE 0647.900.810 

25 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
publishers inequitable terms that are also in breach of the spirit and objective of the 
Directive.  

Last but not least, the terms and conditions governing the use of Apple’s App Store 
can also be used as example of imbalance in bargaining power. In essence, it is equally 
difficult  for  news  publishers  to  forego  a  presence  on  the  Apple  ecosystem  and 
publishers are therefore forced to accept whatever terms and conditions Apple wishes 
to impose, even when this may amount to exploitative abuse.  

Currently, publishers who develop their own apps face important restrictions on what 
they  may  communicate  to  their  users  through  their  apps,  and  the  required  use  of 
Apple’s proprietary in-app purchase system to sell content, which in turn is tied to a 
significant fee, and consequently eliminates competition in payments. Unfortunately, 
Apple  has  shown  no  interest  in  discussing  those  terms  and  conditions  in  the  past, 
which also points towards bargaining power problems.  

Regarding  the  specific  issue  of  payments,  we  believe  that  additional  regulation  is 
needed to ensure open competition. This issue is not new, and EU legislation is already 
in  place  to  ensure  competition  in  payments  when  it  comes  to  banking  institutions 
through the second Payment Services Directive (EU) 2015/2366. We support similar 
legislation to avoid exploitative abuses.  

The bargaining power issues identified demonstrate that a stronger form of regulatory 
incentive is needed to ensure more balance in the way in which platforms interact with 
news publishers. In our view, the introduction of an ex-ante framework with horizontal 
rules for large platforms, inter alia on self-preferencing and other forms of exclusionary 
and exploitative practices, must be an important element of the regulatory response.  

4.6 Dealing with imbalances in bargaining power 

Broader  concerns  over  imbalances  in  bargaining  power,  specifically  in  relation  to 
media  players  and  news  publishers  in  particular,  are  not  new.  Indeed,  there  have 
already been debates about whether the industry should be granted a waiver from anti-
trust laws in order to engage in collective bargaining with systemic gatekeepers such 
as Google and Facebook. The idea is that such bargaining rights could cover different 
activities,  such  as  terms  and  conditions  of  content  distribution,  and  content 
monetisation via licensing and advertising.  

That  has  indeed  been  the  recommendation  of  several  policy  initiatives  globally.  In 
Australia, the ACCC has recommended a mandatory bargaining code of conduct to 
govern the relationship between news media and Google and Facebook, to address 
bargaining  power  imbalances29.  In  the  US,  a  bill  “Journalism  Competition  and 

29 Australian Competition & Consumer Commission (2019) Digital platforms inquiry (link) 

News Media Europe – Square de Meeûs 25 – 1000 Brussels – Belgium – BE 0647.900.810 

26 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Preservation  Act”  is  currently  being  debated  in  the  anti-trust  subcommittee  of  the 
Judiciary Committee30, to grant news media a waiver from anti-trust law to allow them 
to enter into collective negotiations and increase their bargaining power.  

Closer to home in Europe, the German legislator adopted a law in the form of the 9th 
Amendment Bill to the Act Against Restraints of Competition which entered into force 
in June 201731. The amendments included inter alia an exemption from cartel rules for 
certain forms of cooperation between publishers of newspapers.  

More recently, the UK competition authority as part of its “Online platforms and digital 
advertising” market study recommended the establishment of a pro-competitive digital 
regulatory regime, including the development of a code of conduct that would inter alia 
cover elements of the publisher-platform relationship, with issues such as control over 
content, content monetisation and access to user data being addressed32.  

Our view at EU level is that it is clear that further tools, possibly along the lines of some 
of  those  described  above,  are  needed  to  address  the  current  acute  imbalance  in 
bargaining power between news publishers and systemic digital gatekeepers, possibly 
building further on the Platform-to-Business Regulation (EU) 2019/1150 instrument.  

Experience from publishers demonstrates that it is very difficult to bring any of those 
platforms to the table in the first place, let alone to discuss the possibility of deviating 
from the anti-competitive baseline trading relationship that these systemic gatekeepers 
seek to impose on business users.   

News  Media  Europe  has  previously  called  for  news  publishers  to  benefit  from  a 
General Block Exemption Regulation at EU level to allow for collective bargaining rights 
vis-à-vis certain digital gatekeepers  that would ensure better negotiation power and 
immunity from anti-trust cartel rules. We wish to reiterate this call.  

5. Addressing structural market problems through a New 
Competition Tool  

The previous sections identified and described some of the key competition problems 
faced by news media when doing business in the digital economy. Even if some of 
those challenges are specific to the media sector and news publishers, it is also clear 
that many are not insofar as they also concern other businesses operating in digital 
markets in their capacity as business users of, or third parties to, large online platforms.  

30 US Congress (2019) Journalism Competition and Preservation Act of 2019 (link) 
31 Bundeskartellamt (2019) Act against Restraints of Competition (link)  
32 Competition and Markets Authority (2020) Online platforms and digital advertising report (link) 

News Media Europe – Square de Meeûs 25 – 1000 Brussels – Belgium – BE 0647.900.810 

27 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5.1 Reflections on the scope and purpose of a new competition tool 

The competition problems faced by news media warrant in our view the introduction of 
both ex-ante rules for digital gatekeepers and of a complementary new competition 
tool to preserve and restore dynamic competition in digital markets. In particular, the 
introduction  of  ex-ante  rules  for platforms  is  also  in  itself  unlikely  to  be  sufficient  to 
address emerging competition concerns associated with digital markets given the pace 
at which such markets evolve. As such, the introduction of a new competition tool as a 
complementary instrument to ex-ante regulation becomes critically important to ensure 
a healthy competitive process. 

In  this  sense,  we  believe  that  the  proposed  new  competition  tool  could  bring  most 
added  value  to  the  EU  competition  framework  as  a  horizontal,  market-based 
instrument  because  it  could  accordingly  provide  a  clear  basis  for  market-wide 
interventions  to  proactively  promote  competition,  not  only  on  the  basis  of  market 
conduct  but  also  of  market  features.  Such  a  change  in  the  underlying  approach  to 
enforcement would in our view constitute positive and progressive change, but also at 
a more practical level address some of the substantive gaps or limitations associated 
with ex-ante regulation.  

Some  digital  markets  exhibit  important  structural  risks  for  competition,  while  others 
experience a structural lack of competition. The latter in particular may arise notably 
but  not  exclusively  when  the  concerned  market  is  tipping  or  has  already  tipped,  or 
when certain firms become insulated from dynamic competition because their strong 
market  position  becomes  so  entrenched  that  the  market  is  no  longer  properly 
contestable. It is by now abundantly clear that digital market failures are more prevalent 
than  some  commentators  would  suggest,  especially  in  light  of  repeated  claims  not 
supported by little to no evidence that digital markets experience intensive competition 
and that markets remain highly contestable. 

It  is  clear  that  many  market  features  can  play  an  important  role  in  producing  such 
structural outcomes and they include but are not limited to market concentration, high 
vertical  integration  (and  ensuing  conflicts  of  interest),  lack  of  multi-homing,  lack  of 
access  to  data,  extreme  economies  of  scale  and  scope,  strong  direct  and  indirect 
network effects, the gatekeeping role of some platforms and broader relationships of 
economic dependency, the development of platforms ecosystems or walled-gardens, 
and  general  lack  of  transparency.  When  combined,  these  dynamics  favour  the 
continued  incumbency  of  large platforms  and  raise  questions  as  to  whether  certain 
markets are even still contestable.  

News Media Europe – Square de Meeûs 25 – 1000 Brussels – Belgium – BE 0647.900.810 

28 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5.2 Harmful market conduct by large platforms not in the scope of the EU 
competition framework 

At  a  more  granular  level,  it  is  of  particular  concern  that  large  platforms  are  able  to 
leverage their market power, or strategic market position in the case of gatekeepers, 
from one market to another, or multiple others, in ways that are not possible for other 
market operators to replicate and that are inconsistent with the principle of competition 
on the merits. As such, it is important that the current regulatory toolbox is strengthened 
when it comes to platforms that are largely insulated from dynamic competition, and 
who engage in harmful market conduct, especially when the said conduct is identified 
in the absence of a finding of dominance within the meaning of EU competition law and 
Article 102 TFEU.  

This is important because some platforms may in the absence of a dominant status in 
a given defined market still play a role of systemic importance in the marketplace, for 
instance by virtue of their role as gatekeepers, derived from their strategic position in 
the market as an intermediary. The market conduct of such gatekeepers is as such 
able to produce important exclusionary and exploitative effects to the detriment of other 
economic operators and consumers alike, that should raise serious concerns about 
harm.  

It is therefore essential that the new competition tool does not become a dominance-
based instrument. A case in point may be the emerging market smart speakers, voice 
assistants  and  similar  internet-of-things  audio-based  technologies  which  raise 
significant concerns about a handful of companies that may become gatekeepers33 in 
an oligopolistic market structure, where no single platform may necessarily achieve a 
market dominant status.  

The French competition authority put forward earlier this year interesting proposals on 
digital gatekeepers34, reflecting a progressive understanding of underlying theories of 
harm in digital markets applicable in the case of non-dominant undertakings. In that 
context,  a  number  of  harmful  and  abusive  gatekeeper  practices  were  identified  as 
raising  concerns  including  discrimination,  preventing  access  to  markets  where  the 
gatekeeper  is  not  dominant,  leveraging  data  where  the  gatekeeper  is  dominant, 
making  interoperability  more  difficult,  making  portability  more  difficult,  and  making 
multihoming more difficult.  

It is also clear that the current competition framework has reached its limits when it 
comes to markets that have already irreversibly tipped, or are about to tip, and that 
new  and  better  use  of  restorative  remedies,  including  interim  measures,  is  needed 

33 Oxford Reuters Institute for the Study of Journalism (2018) The Future of Voice and the Implications for News 
(link) 
34 Autorité de la Concurrence (2020) Contribution de l’Autorité de la concurrence au débat sur la politique de 
concurrence et les enjeux numériques (link) 

News Media Europe – Square de Meeûs 25 – 1000 Brussels – Belgium – BE 0647.900.810 

29 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
going  forward.  The  new  competition  tool  should  therefore  aim  to  address  this 
enforcement gap. For this to be possible, the scope of the proposed instrument should 
cover both structural and non-structural (behavioural) remedies.  

That is especially important given recent experience and difficulties associated with 
overseeing  the  effective  implementation  of  behavioural  remedies  in  digital  markets, 
which  we  suspect  will  gradually  lead  to  more  prevalent  use  of  structural  remedies, 
especially if the aggressive market conduct of certain platforms remains unchanged. 
We  furthermore  wish  to  highlight  the  importance  of  explicitly  including  data-related 
remedies in the scope of the proposed instrument, including mandated access to data 
for  third  parties,  mandated  interoperability,  and  mandated  data  separation  or 
prevention from integration.  

5.3 How the new competition tool could address the concerns of the news 
media 

Overall, it is our understanding that a new competition tool should be an instrument 
sufficiently flexible to address a variety of different competitive scenarios that may arise 
in digital markets. One of the main benefits of a new competition tool should therefore 
be to promote timely and efficient intervention in such markets before irreparable harm 
occurs, in what may be described as strengthening the preventive arm of competition 
policy. Keeping up with change in digital markets is already widely recognised as a 
major challenge for competition authorities that contributes to the enforcement gap35. 
The proposed instrument should therefore seek to add value in this area.  

Our  submission  identifies  several  situations  where  the  imminent  launch  of  new 
products and services by large platforms, or changes to terms and conditions, are the 
source of competition concerns, and where a new competition tool could be envisaged 
as an instrument capable of swift and proportionate intervention on justified grounds, 
before irreparable harm occurs. The market-wide intervention powers are also relevant 
in  such  cases  to  avoid  “reinventing  the  wheel”  in  some  scenarios,  such  as  those 
involving Google’s harmful market conduct in vertical, specialised search markets. 

So while it is clear that a number of procedural safeguards should be introduced as 
regards the new competition tool, both as a matter of general good law and to ensure 
that  the  tool  is  not  misused,  such  safeguards  should  not  be  so  burdensome  as  to 
undermine  timely  intervention  in  the  market  or  to  reproduce  lengthy  procedures 
traditionally associated with competition cases, or be opened to other abusive “delay 
tactics”. Any process of judicial review should benefit from a fast track procedure with 
competent courts of justice.  

35 J. Crémer, Y-A. de Montjoye and H. Schweitzer (2018) Report on “Competition policy for the digital era” (link) 

News Media Europe – Square de Meeûs 25 – 1000 Brussels – Belgium – BE 0647.900.810 

30 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
In any event, it remains essential for any new competition tool to have sufficient powers 
to pose a credible challenge to the systemic, anti-competitive market conduct of certain 
large online platforms. It is clear that large platforms are able to approach competition 
proceedings  as  a  cost  of  doing  business,  while  conversely  for  other  businesses  in 
digital markets the questions at stake are more often than not of an existential nature. 
The new competition tool should therefore act as a deterrent against harmful market 
conduct  and  bring  more  discipline  to  digital  markets,  with  the  understanding  that 
dissuasiveness should remain a cornerstone of EU competition policy.  

As concerns the relationship between the proposed new competition tool and other 
competition instruments, such as sector inquiries, enforcement through cases and the 
foreseen ex-ante rules, some clarifications would be needed regarding the preferred 
approach according to the circumstances. As previously iterated, we view one of the 
major benefits of a new competition tool as the ability to swiftly intervene in markets to 
prevent irreparable damage.  

That will however only be possible if the substantive standard of proof to be met for 
imposing necessary and proportionate remedies is lowered, possibly reversed under 
specific  circumstances,  as  compared  to  current  practice  in  individual  enforcement 
cases. Since the process should be open to judicial review and would not involve the 
formal  finding  of  an  infringement  nor  fines  or  other  penalties,  this  seems  to  be  a 
reasonable compromise approach that could safeguard procedural fairness while also 
ensuring the flexibility required to successfully operate the proposed instrument.  

6. Emerging issues in online advertising 

Online advertising plays a uniquely important role in funding journalism across Europe, 
at a time of important difficulties for our industry. The digital transformation of news 
publishers in particular continues to be a complicated process as the growth in digital 
revenues is often insufficient to offset lost revenues from the legacy print business.  

Regulatory initiatives in the field of advertising are therefore of direct concern to our 
industry  which,  in  the  wake  of  important  challenges  in  developing  new  content 
monetisation strategies, will continue to be very reliant on advertising revenues to be 
able to fund quality journalism in the foreseeable future.  

Based  on  the  European  Commission  public  consultation  and  discussions  in  the 
European Parliament on the Digital Services Act, we wish to submit comments on a 
number of advertising-related themes: 

•  Transparency in commercial communications  
•  Political advertising 
•  Advertising Technology “Ad-Tech”  

News Media Europe – Square de Meeûs 25 – 1000 Brussels – Belgium – BE 0647.900.810 

31 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
•  Personal data and advertising 

6.1 Transparency in commercial communications 

There  is  absolutely  no  doubt  that  advertisement  should  be  identifiable  as 
advertisement, whether that is on paper or in a digital format36. EU legislation already 
ensures in several ways that “commercial communications” should be identifiable as 
such,  even  if  the  precise  standards  through  which  this  requirement  is  implemented 
currently varies depending on the Member State.  

It is indeed also necessary to ensure that audiences are able to correctly identify who 
is communicating with them through online advertising, and who is paying for the ads 
that are being delivered to them, so that a safe and trusted online space is fostered.  

With  such  concerns  borne  in  mind,  the  news  media  industry  continues  to  be  very 
supportive of self-regulatory initiatives in the field of advertising as means of achieving 
good  outcomes  that  balance  all  the  interests  at  stake  in  this  debate.  Our  industry 
proactively supports self-regulation as means of achieving more efficient and better 
results than through lengthy and burdensome regulatory procedures involving public 
authorities.  

We  and  our  members  work  together  with  self-regulatory  organisations  at  European 
and  national  level  to  ensure  that  problems  identified  by  consumers,  regulators  and 
businesses in relation to commercial communications, be they related to content or 
delivery, can be addressed in a good manner.  

We are of the view that if there are concerns associated with the status quo concerning 
transparency requirements on commercial communications, that this should be raised 
as an issue with self-regulatory bodies in the first place to better understand whether 
legislation  is  even  needed  or  justified.  We  remain  available  to  further  discuss  the 
ongoing work in the field of advertising self-regulation.  

6.2 Political advertising 

The issue of political advertisement has received significant attention in recent years 
due to various interrelated developments. There have been suggestions that the EU 
should seek to further regulate such advertising, notably based on the understanding 
that  what  is  illegal  offline,  should  also  be  illegal  online.  We  therefore  share  some 
observations below.  

36 International Chamber of Commerce (2018) Advertising and Marketing Communications Code (link) 

News Media Europe – Square de Meeûs 25 – 1000 Brussels – Belgium – BE 0647.900.810 

32 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Much of the discussion on political advertising follows from growing concerns about 
disinformation, election interference and large-scale manipulation taking place in the 
ecosystems of powerful online platforms.  

Often,  however,  such  political  ads  that  are  cause  for  concern  are  enabled  by  the 
mismanagement of citizens’ data by large online platforms, who continue to face little 
to no accountability for their role and lack of transparency. 

It is clear that large online platforms such as those operating as social networks could 
do much more to ensure that political advertising takes place under sound conditions. 
This includes but is not limited to transparency for users on why they are seeing certain 
ads, verifying the identity of advertisers, and revealing how much political advertisers 
are spending, for instance.  

We therefore suggest that possible additional regulation should be targeted and limited 
in scope so as not to adversely impact editorial media that is already regulated and not 
the source of the concerns that tend to be raised (eg. print, journalistic outlets online, 
radio and tv).  

In fact, more traditional forms of media such as print and broadcasters are in most EU 
countries, in one form or another, already covered by relevant legislation and laws that 
apply to political advertisement, notably through electoral law.  

We therefore wish to avoid conflict with or overburdening existing systems that may 
already be functional, with additional regulation that could have the adverse effect of 
undermining existing measures or overburdening editorial media.  

6.3 Advertising Technology “Ad-Tech”  

The ad-tech and broader third-party ecosystem that characterises the contemporary 
online advertising industry is very important to news publishers because it allows news 
organisations  to  efficiently  monetise  their  content  without  necessarily  having  to 
possess  the  relevant  in-house  technological  knowledge  and  expertise.  This  is 
particularly  useful  for  smaller  and  medium-sized  businesses,  such  as  local  and 
regional publishers.  

In practice, the use of advertising technology allows news publishers to drive a better 
match between the ads served and the audiences that they reach, meaning that such 
ads have a better conversion rate (ie. the desired outcome in terms of either raising 
awareness  or  leading  to  an  actionable  outcome  such  as  the  sale  of  a  product  or 
service).  For  this  reason,  advertising  space  can  command  a  higher  price  with 
marketeers, which helps to drive profitability.  

News Media Europe – Square de Meeûs 25 – 1000 Brussels – Belgium – BE 0647.900.810 

33 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Working with third parties to form an online advertising supply-chain, however, also 
means that news organisations are only partially in control of the supply-chain. This 
loss of control is not inherently harmful but poses a number of challenges in the present 
environment in the absence of an appropriate overarching framework that helps ensure 
collective responsible behaviour and accountability in the marketplace. 

The current challenges are in particular exacerbated by the presence of tech giants 
with immense market power who are in position to act unilaterally with no regard for 
other market participants. The strong position and vertical integration of Google along 
the ad-tech value chain is of major concern here. As such, it is clear to news publishers 
that much more can be done to improve transparency to the benefit of all participants 
involved.  

While the overall situation has arguably improved from a data protection point of view 
since the GDPR came into force in 2018, there are still basic transparency concerns 
that persist as regards bidding processes and matching functions, pricing, hidden fees, 
and  the  wider  competitive  process.  For  instance,  and  as  already  explained  in  the 
section concerning gatekeepers, a recent study by PwC UK suggests that 15% of every 
British  Pound  spent  by  advertisers  “disappear”  in  the  supply  chain  and  cannot  be 
accounted for37.  

As news publishers seek to develop a trusted and safe digital environment in which to 
serve customers and to develop better products and solutions, they need to ensure 
that all of their partners act responsibly. It is therefore of the highest importance that 
news publishers, also being ultimately responsible for the impact that activities may 
have on direct users of their service, are able to conduct audit assessments of other 
participants in the supply-chain, even in the absence of direct contractual relationships 
with advertising intermediaries.   

As  industry  best  practice  and  norms  evolve,  such  auditing  practices  are  becoming 
more common place and accepted. However, not all market participants, least of which 
large online platforms, and in particular Google who maintains an extremely strong and 
vertically integrated presence throughout the online advertising market, are willing to 
accept  to  be  transparently  audited  for  the  purpose  of  ensuring  that  acceptable 
standards  are  met  in  the  broader  process  of  serving  ads  to  users.  Regulation  may 
therefore be needed to ensure that the use of audit procedures becomes possible.  

While such effective, enforceable controls targeted against the platforms need to be 
implemented quickly, in the meantime, an immediate practical approach, could be to 
encourage the development of a self-regulatory system of transparent receipting and 
billing, enabling buyers and sellers of advertising inventory to better understand the 

37 PricewaterhouseCoopers (2020) ISBA Programmatic Supply Chain Transparency Study (link) 

News Media Europe – Square de Meeûs 25 – 1000 Brussels – Belgium – BE 0647.900.810 

34 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
underlying  financial  dealings  that  drive  the  distribution  of  profits  along  the  online 
advertising value chain.  

The importance of conducting such audits cannot be understated. There are concerns 
associated  with  competition  law,  consumer  protection,  data  protection,  privacy 
protection, disinformation, other forms of harmful content, and other illegal or bad ads. 
All of these possible areas of concern warrant some degree of access to all participants 
in the supply chain to ensure better control by first parties and to safeguard the best 
interest of legitimate businesses and consumers alike.  

We stress that any new regime should be targeted at the platforms, neither placing 
new or broader legal responsibilities upon publishers, or allowing the platforms to shift 
their  responsibilities  to  them,  nor  require  publishers  to  perform  unreasonable  due 
diligence checks beyond normal contractual requirements, nor be placed at risk of legal 
liability for failure to do so. 

6.4 Personal data and advertising 

Following discussions on the DSA that have taken place in the European Parliament, 
we wish to highlight our industry’s strong commitment to continue implementing the 
GDPR  and  the  ePrivacy  Directive  (2002/58/EC),  which  are  currently  into  force  and 
which  together  constitute  the  core  regulatory  framework  governing  the  online 
advertising industry. 

We  note  that  it  has  been  suggested  that  this  framework  is  insufficient  to  obtain 
meaningful user consent to the relevant data-driven operations used to deliver ads, 
which we strongly disagree with. News publishers provide ample and comprehensive 
information to website users and audiences about how online ads are served and make 
use of user information in the form of personal data.  

Specifically,  under  the  GDPR  and  ePrivacy  framework,  audiences  already  have 
transparent  access  to  the  type  of  data  collected,  the  purpose  for  which  they  are 
processed, and can consent and withdraw consent or opt-out at any time.   

It  has  also  been  suggested  that  another,  additional  layer  of  consent  specific  to 
advertising should be introduced. We view such proposals as redundant, unnecessary, 
burdensome, and inconsistent with existing rules. We  further take  the view that the 
current regulatory framework is fit for purpose and should not be undermined in this 
way.  

This  means  that  new  proposals  to  create  another  layer  of  rules  regarding  profiling, 
tracking  and  targeting  of  users,  or  other  opt-in  or  opt-out  systems,  and  use  of 
behavioural data, should be avoided altogether and at all costs. This will ensure that 

News Media Europe – Square de Meeûs 25 – 1000 Brussels – Belgium – BE 0647.900.810 

35 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the current and already comprehensive data and privacy protection rulebook is applied 
in a consistent and effective manner.   

We also wish to note that proposals to introduce so-called “accountability and fairness 
criteria”  to  algorithms  used  to  target  users  with  advertisement  to  allow  the  use  of 
external audits could prove a very demanding and burdensome exercise. We suggest 
that existing tools in the field of audit are explored before considering any regulatory 
measures.  

News Media Europe – Square de Meeûs 25 – 1000 Brussels – Belgium – BE 0647.900.810 

36 

 
 
 
