Ref. Ares(2020)4626454 - 05/09/2020

Via	Laietana,	60	–	5a	planta	
08003	Barcelona	
Tel	93	552	81	60	
Fax	93	552	82	88	
http://acco.gencat.cat	
autoritat.competencia@gencat.cat	

ACCO's	contribution	to	the	DIGITAL	SERVICE	ACT	workshop	

Marc	Realp	-	Director	General	of	the	Catalan	Competition	Authority	

Barcelona,	July	23,	2020	

CORE	IDEAS	IN	30	SECONDS:	

"We	like	the	benefits	of	digital	platforms"	

However,	competition,	taxes	and	the	labour	market	are	not	yet	designed	according	
to	 this	 new	 digital	 reality	 that	 presents	 not	 just	 benefits	 but	 also	 negative	 aspects	
that	need	to	be	corrected.	

“Guaranteeing	market	access:	The	key	that	opens	the	door	to	competition	"	

It	 would	 be	 a	 good	 idea	 here	 to	 define	 the	 criteria	 for	 determining	 when	 a	 digital	
platform	becomes	a	Gatekeeper	and	what	structural	measure(s)	would	be	the	most	
appropriate	 for	 guaranteeing	 market	 access.	 This	 Gatekeeper	 definition	 can	 even	
change	according	to	the	product	or	geographical	market,	so	the	applicable	measures	
may	differ	in	each	case.	

“The	need	for	having	powers	to	manage	glocal	regulation."	

Therefore,	 whether	 for	 the	 purposes	 of	 implementing	 and	 supervising	 structural	
measures	 imposed	 on	 digital	 platforms	 or	 of	 overseeing	 sectoral	 regulation,	 the	
ACCO	 considers	 it	 appropriate	 for	 a	 future	 digital	 regulator	 to	 be	 structured	
independently	of	governments	and	at	various	territorial	levels	(with	the	consequent	
delegation	of	powers),	so	that	an	intervention	can	be	made	not	just	at	the	European	
level	but	at	state	and	regional	levels	too.	

“The	 competition	 authorities	 are	 in	 the	 best	 position	 to	 guarantee	 an	 appropriate	
application	of	the	digital	regulation."	

Digital	 platforms,	 then,	 ought	 to	 be	 regulated	 by	 a	 cross-cutting	 authority,	 such	 as	
the	competition	authorities,	which	also	enjoys	independence	in	its	actions.	

DEVELOPMENT	OF	CORE	IDEAS	IN	30	SECONDS:	

1	

	
	
	
	
	
	
"We	like	the	benefits	of	digital	platforms"	

From	the	 point	 of	view	 of	 competition,	 the	digital	revolution	is	 having	 many	positive	
effects.	The	Catalan	Competition	Authority	(ACCO)	already	highlighted	these	effects	in	
a	2014	study	entitled	"Transactions	between	equals	and	competition”1.	This	study	was	
mentioned	 by	 the	 U.S.	 Federal	 Trade	 Commission	 two	 years	 later	 and	 supplemented	
with	 another	 study	 by	 the	 ACCO	 entitled	 "Transactions	 between	 equals	 and	
competition.	A	step	forward"2.	

Ultimately,	 the	 main	 benefits	 to	 consumers	 of	 the	 digital	 revolution	 come	 from	 a	
significant	 reduction	 in	 transaction	 costs.	 Thanks	 to	 digital	 platforms,	 supply	 and	
demand	 are	 much	 closer,	 and	 entry	 barriers	 are,	 in	 theory,	 lower	 than	 ever	 before.	
Consumers	have	therefore	experienced	a	higher	number	of	higher-quality	options	with	
better	prices.	

The	 COVID-19	 crisis	 has	 accelerated	 the	 implementation	 of	 digital	 platforms	 even	
more.	 We	 have	 all	 seen	 how	 many	 companies	 have	 been	 forced	 to	 change	 from	 the	
traditional	 business	 model	 to	 the	 digital	 or	 on-line	 model	 and	 how	 Amazon,	 for	
example,	 has	 been	 currently	 experiencing	 extraordinary	 numbers.	 Regulators	 have	
unfortunately	 not	 adapted	 to	 the	 new	 reality	 so	 quickly.	 For	 example,	 ACCO	 has	
recently	 called	 on	 the	 Catalan	 and	 Spanish	 governments	 to	 change	 regulation	 and	
allow	 the	 online	 supply	 of	 drugs,	 to	 reduce	 consumer	 and	 pharmacist	 exposure	 to	
COVID-19.	

Besides	the	emergence	of	digital	platforms,	there	is	another	significant	change	caused	
by	the	“digital	revolution”.	From	a	material	point	of	view,	it	is	a	particular	feature	of	
the	 digital	 revolution	 that	 some	 physical	 services	 are	 becoming	 virtual	 services,	
meaning	 that	 data	 are	 replacing	 physical	 products.	 There	 are	 numerous	 examples:	
newspapers	 are	 already	 digital,	 music	 and	 films	 are	 being	 distributed	 online	 rather	
than	 on	 CDs	 or	 DVDs,	 books	 are	 coming	 out	 in	 digital	 formats,	 etc.	 With	 the	 mass	
advent	of	3D	printers	over	the	next	few	years,	this	trend	will	be	consolidated	and	the	
most	relevant	component	of	a	transaction	will	be	data	rather	than	the	product.	

However,	competition,	taxes	and	the	labour	market	are	not	yet	designed	according	
to	 this	 new	 digital	 reality	 that	 presents	 not	 just	 benefits	 but	 also	 negative	 aspects	
that	need	to	be	corrected.	

“Guaranteeing	market	access:	The	key	that	opens	the	door	to	competition	"	

1http://acco.gencat.cat/web/.content/80_acco/documents/arxius/actuacions/ES_7_2014_TRANSACCIONS_ENTRE_IG
UALS_-I_COMPETENCIA_CAT.pdf 
2 http://acco.gencat.cat/web/.content/80_acco/documents/arxius/actuacions/P2P-Un-pas-endavant_DEF.pdf 

2	

	
	
	
	
																																																													
From	 the	 competition	 perspective	 there	 is	 one	 factor	 that	 is	 considered	 particularly	
decisive,	such	as	enabling	access	to	the	operator	market.	And	that	is	because	market	
access	 is	 a	 necessary	 condition	 for	 the	 very	 existence	 of	 competition	 and,	 therefore,	
for	 consumers	 and	 suppliers	 to	 be	 able	 to	 enjoy	 efficiency	 in	 reducing	 transaction	
costs,	as	discussed	above.		

That	 is	 why	 competition	 authorities	 take	 care	 to	 ensure	 that	 no	 regulatory	 entry	
barriers	are	imposed	and	go	after	every	type	of	operator	behaviour	that	has	attempted	
to	restrict	access	to	the	competitor's	market,	often	by	abusing	their	dominant	position.	

Digital	 platforms	 constitute	 a	 particular	 case	 of	 operators	 as	 they	 generally	 act	 as	
intermediates	 between	 suppliers	 (other	 operators)	 and	 end	 consumers.	 Platforms,	
then,	 are	 set	 up	 as	 a	 channel	 connecting	 the	 market	 (end	 consumers)	 with	 potential	
offerors.	The	main	risk	in	terms	of	competition	is	the	concentration	of	digital	platform	
markets,	 where	 one	 or	 a	 few	 platforms	 have	 most	 of	 the	 market	 at	 their	 disposal	
owing	to	the	well-known	network	effects,	and	therefore	that	digital	platforms	become	
"gatekeepers"	(or	guardians	of	the	gateways	giving	access	to	the	markets).	And	that	is	
because	a	gatekeeper	may	prove	capable	of	having	an	adverse	effect	on	competition	
conditions	even	where	its	market	share	fails	to	make	it	a	dominant	operator	(being	an	
operator	with	a	significant	market	share	will	be	enough).		

A	 textbook	 case	 of	 this	 risk	 can	 be	 seen	 where	 the	 gatekeeper	 also	 operates	 at	 the	
offeror	 level.	 So,	 for	 example,	 where	 a	 large	 operator	 not	 only	 manages	 the	
intermediation	 platform	 but	 also	 offers	
intermediation	
platform’s	 management	 will	 likely	 be	 neutral	 and	 discriminate	 in	 favour	 of	 its	 own	
products	 against	 those	 of	 other	 competitors,	 thereby	 making	 effective	 competition	
(access	to	a	neutral	market)	harder	for	the	other	small	operators.			

its	 own	 products,	 the	

That	is	why	ACCO	considers	it	appropriate	for	gatekeepers	to	be	regulated,	to	minimize	
the	possibility	of	private	operators	having	an	undue	influence	on	a	factor	as	crucial	as	
market	access.	The	measures	proposed	so	far,	from	less	to	more	interventionist,	are:	

•  Establishing	interoperability	obligations	and	open	APIs,	to	ensure	third-party	

access	to	data	and	"socialised”	network	effects.	

•  Having	all	acquisitions	scrutinised,	to	prevent	"killer	acquisitions".	
•  Establishing	accounting-separation	and	economic-independence	obligations,	to	
guarantee	the	independent	economic	behaviour	of	two	business	units	and	avoid	
cross-financing	and	financial	leverage.	

•  Structural	separation	and	limitation	of	cross-ownership.	

It	 would	 be	 a	 good	 idea	 here	 to	 define	 the	 criteria	 for	 determining	 when	 a	 digital	
platform	becomes	a	gatekeeper	and	what	structural	measure(s)	would	be	the	most	
appropriate	 for	 guaranteeing	 market	 access.	 This	 gatekeeper	 definition	 can	 even	

3	

	
	
	
	
change	according	to	the	product	or	geographical	market,	so	the	applicable	measures	
may	differ	in	each	case.	

“The	need	for	having	powers	to	manage	glocal	regulation."	

There	 is	 debate	 over	 determining	 when	 a	 digital	 platform	 is	 a	 digital	 intermediation	
service	or	when	the	platform	is	also	a	service	provider	that	is	offered	to	end	users	and,	
therefore,	 whether	 the	 sectoral	 regulations	 for	 the	 service	 that	 is	 offered	 apply.	 The	
European	 Court	 of	 Justice	 (ECJ)	 has	 been	 creating	 case	 law	 on	 this	 matter3	 and,	
generally	 speaking,	 it	 may	 be	 determined	 that	 where	 a	 platform	 sets	 the	 price	 and	
conditions	 of	 the	 services	 it	 offers,	 it	 becomes	 a	 service	 provider	 and	 is	 therefore	
responsible	for	that	service.	This	aspect	is	important	because	governments	at	all	levels	
launch	sectoral	regulations	to	manage	negative	externalities	that	economic	activity	can	
generate.	

Contrary	 to	 what	 some	 claim,	 digital	 platforms	 are	 not	 examples	 of	 unregulated	
environments.	 Digital	 platforms	 present	 important	 aspects	 in	 quality	 regulation	 such	
as:	 information	 on	 the	 service,	 guarantees,	 complaint	 systems,	 classification	 and	
reputation	systems	and,	in	some	cases,	even	price	fixing.	It	is	therefore	important	for	a	
general	 framework	 to	 be	 established	 for	 digital	 platforms	 with	 obligations	 in	 the	
matter	 of	 transparency,	 non-discrimination,	 and	 portability	 of	 reputation.	 The	 EU	
Regulation	on	Platform-To-Business	Relations	(P2B),	which	was	approved	in	June	last	
year4,	is	a	good	initiative	for	establishing	a	harmonised	framework	at	European	level.	

Therefore,	when	it	comes	to	sectoral	regulation,	governments	should	no	longer	focus	
on	regulating	quality	but	should	focus	instead	on	regulating	negative	externalities	such	
as	 safety,	 pollution,	 occupation	 of	 the	 public	 domain,	 etc.	 It	 is	 evident	 that	 such	
sectoral	 regulation	 may	 differ	 locally,	 according	 to	 the	 realities	 of	 each	 case	 (city,	
region,	 state),	 but	 in	 any	 case	 it	 ought	 to	 follow	 not	 just	 the	 principles	 of	 necessity,	
proportionality,	 minimal	 distortion	 and	 non-discrimination	 of	 every	 good	 regulation	
but	also	certain	criteria,	to	guarantee	market	unity	at	European	level.	In	general,	it	is	
the	 competition	 authorities	 that	 have	 the	 powers	 to	 exercise	 control	 over	
governments	over	the	compliance	of	these	good-regulation	criteria.	

In	 conclusion,	 interventions	 from	 an	 area	 such	 as	 the	 European	 Union	 will	 enable	 a	
degree	 of	 harmonisation	 in	 how	 to	 approach	 the	 digital	 platforms	 that	 act	 as	

3 JCJEU of 19 December 2019, Case C-390/18 (Airbnb) 
http://curia.europa.eu/juris/document/document.jsf?text=&docid=221791&pageIndex=0&doclang=ES&mode=lst&dir=&o
cc=first&part=1&cid=10581348 I JCJEU of 20 December 2017, Case C-434/15 (Uber) 
http://curia.europa.eu/juris/document/document.jsf?text=&docid=198047&pageIndex=0&doclang=ES&mode=req&dir=&
occ=first&part=1.  
4 https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/ES/TXT/HTML/?uri=CELEX:32019R1150&from=EN 

4	

	
	
	
	
	
																																																													
"gatekeepers"	and	the	negative	externalities	that	they	can	generate.	Even	so,	we	must	
not	 forget	 that	 the	 digital	 sphere	 also	 presents	 different	 realities	 according	 to	 the	
sector,	product	or	geographic	market	and	that	governments	at	various	levels	need	to	
regulate.	

It	is	therefore	to	be	expected	that	both	the	very	functioning	of	gatekeepers	and	their	
actions	with	regard	to	each	of	the	various	sectors	of	activity	will	be	subject	to	cross-
cutting	 regulation.	 Such	 circumstances	 will	 require	 a	 body	 that	 exercises	 effective	
control	 over	 the	 activity	 of	 gatekeepers,	 whether	 by	 ensuring	 that	 the	 structural	
measures	 affecting	 them	 properly	 apply	 to	 them	 or	 by	 determining	 the	 suitability	 of	
limiting	their	sectoral	activity	owing	to	possible	externalities.	

Therefore,	 whether	 for	 the	 purposes	 of	 implementing	 and	 supervising	 structural	
measures	 imposed	 on	 digital	 platforms	 or	 of	 overseeing	 sectoral	 regulation,	 the	
ACCO	 considers	 it	 appropriate	 for	 a	 future	 digital	 regulator	 to	 be	 structured	
independently	of	governments	and	at	various	territorial	levels	(with	the	consequent	
delegation	of	powers),	so	that	an	intervention	can	be	made	not	just	at	the	European	
level	but	at	state	and	regional	levels	too.	

“The	 competition	 authorities	 are	 in	 the	 best	 position	 to	 guarantee	 an	 appropriate	
application	of	the	digital	regulation."	

Finally,	 the	 effectiveness	 of	 the	 regulation	 crucially	 rests	 not	 just	 on	 its	 own	 design	
(what	it	applies	to)	and	territoriality	(where	it	applies)	but	also	on	"how"	it	applies.		

Digital	 regulation	 is	 a	 cross-sectional	 regulation	 insofar	 as	 it	 affects	 many	 different	
areas	 of	 activity.	 But	 that	 is	 because,	 as	 much	 of	 the	 need	 for	 regulating	 the	 digital	
environment	 has	 pointed	 out,	 the	 ultimate	 goal	 behind	 the	 regulation	 itself	 is	 none	
other	 than	 to	 ensure	 that	 markets,	 in	 this	 area	 too,	 are	 competitive.	 And	 the	 more	
competitive	the	markets	are,	the	greater	the	expected	well-being	for	consumers	and	
users.	

Digital	platforms,	then,	should	ideally	be	regulated	and	supervised	by	a	cross-cutting	
authority,	such	as	the	competition	authorities,	which	also	enjoys	independence	in	its	
actions,	a	particularly	appreciable	insofar	as	its	intervention	is	especially	key	to	the	
functioning	 of	 the	 economy	 and	 should	 always	 be	 guided	 by	 exclusively	 technical	
criteria.		

5	

	
	
	
	
	
