Ref. Ares(2020)4626454 - 05/09/2020

Via Laietana, 60 – 5a planta 
08003 Barcelona 
Tel  93 552 81 60 
Fax 93 552 82 88 
http://acco.gencat.cat 
autoritat.competencia@gencat.cat 

Catalan Competition Authority Contributions on the antitrust 
changes in view of the digital economy  

Preliminary 

The Catalan Competition Authority has been very active in studying possible 
modifications to the antitrust discipline.  

This line of work started several years ago. In particular, right after “The data-driven 
economy. Challenges for competition”1 was published in 2016, which took place just a 
few months after we published another meaningful document “Transactions between 
peers (P2P). A step forward”2. Those two documents lead us to the conclusion that we 
were effectively facing a different scenario than the one was in place the moment 
current antitrust regulation was passed. Consequently, it was more than possible that 
there was a mismatch between current reality and antitrust regulation.  

In view of the need to innovate, we contacted Mr. Ferran Adrià (famous innovative 
cooker who turned his job into explaining and sharing his methodology to innovate – so 
called Sàpiens Methodology -). Leaded by him, we started scrutinizing different 
elements of the antitrust doctrine and we ended up with a document on a number of 
possible changes.    

At the beginning of this 2020 we organized a series of conferences3 with a number 
international attendees all related to the need of rethinking competition regulation and 
update how such bodies should work.    

More recently, the Catalan Competition Authority submitted – jointly with the Spanish 
Competition Authority – a contribution on the consultation on the White Paper on AI4.   

And by the end of June, the Catalan Competition Authority also sent its “feedback”5 in 
relation to the consultation on a new competition tool6. 

We have also just produced a response both to the new competition tool consultation 
and to the Digital Services Act Package consultation.     
By means of this document, we aim to summarize the most relevant ideas the Catalan 
Competition Authority has produced in relation to the need of rethinking competition.  

1 http://acco.gencat.cat/web/.content/80_acco/documents/arxius/actuacions/Eco-Dades-i-Competencia-ACCO-
angles.pdf 
2 http://acco.gencat.cat/web/.content/80_acco/documents/arxius/actuacions/P2P-Transactions-and-competition-a-step-
forward.pdf. We even produced a cartoon explanatory vídeo 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XzmxEgqM86o&feature=emb_logo 
3 http://acco.gencat.cat/ca/detall/article/20200115_cicle_conferencies_palau_macaya 
4 https://ec.europa.eu/info/law/better-regulation/have-your-say/initiatives/12270-White-Paper-on-Artificial-Intelligence-a-
European-Approach/public-consultation 
5 http://acco.gencat.cat/web/.content/80_acco/documents/arxius/actuacions/20200707_FEEDBACK-ON-NEW-
COMPETITION-TOOL-CONSULTATION-DEF.pdf 
6 https://ec.europa.eu/info/law/better-regulation/have-your-say/initiatives/12416-New-competition-tool/public-consultation 

1 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
                                                           
NEW SITUATION – NEW PARADIGM 

Economy is now quite different than how it was traditionally characterized.  

Currently most services experience the so-called 0 marginal cost production and at 
least a number of them are sold at 0 pricing; consequently, it is not to be expected a 
higher price should there be a dominant undertaking willing to take the benefit of such 
situation. On the contrary, should there be an abuse of such power it may not affect the 
price dimension of the service but its quality (strategy that also takes the benefit of the 
information asymmetry that users experience7).   

There is another characteristic particularly relevant in the digital or data economy, 
which is the speed at which it evolves and the difficult of restoring competition once the 
market has tipped.  

Just these two characteristics (even though there are some more such as “price 
transparency”, hyper personalization, etc.) show that there is not only a need to have a 
new set of tools (for example to address quality infringements that could take the form 
of user’s privacy demotion), but also to set a new paradigm that allows for a quicker 
intervention. In other words, it is not possible to condition the reaction of an antitrust 
body to have evidence of direct harm on users/consumers. It is required to act before 
such damage takes place and so the basis of the intervention must shift from the 
“theory of harm [to final users]” to the “theory of harm to the market functioning”.       

NEW MARKET (“DIGITAL”) & NEW BARRIERS TO ENTRY 

It is clear that an increasing percentage of the economic activity now takes place in the 
digital environment.  

Antitrust authorities have traditionally work to eliminate barriers to entry. Now, this 
same task has to be directed towards those barriers to entry to that digital environment.  

That digital environment has at least two main characteristics: (i) it is key to be able to 
make use of new technologies and, particularly, of AI and (ii) there are platforms that 
put in contact supply and demand and that may even turn into “gatekeepers”.  

It is crucial to compete on equal terms in the digital environment to be able to use 
digital capabilities. First of all, to serve content through the internet (all the discussions 
on net neutrality), but also to be able to make use of the AI (which in turn requires data, 
cloud computing, etc.).  

And it is also of utmost relevance that those platforms that become gatekeepers (i.e. 
even though there may not be considered dominant, are key for suppliers to reach a 
significant percentage of its potential demand – they have significant market power- ) 
restrain from incurring in antitrust infringements. It is important to stress that to be a 
gatekeeper it is not necessary to be an essential facility, but merely a relevant door to 
access to a significant amount of potential demand.  

7 See Appendix A http://infolab.stanford.edu/~backrub/google.html.  

2 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
 
EX ANTE ACTIVITY TO PRESERVE COMPETITION 

The ex ante activity are all those actions carried out by regulators and competition 
bodies to ensure that competition is possible in the market.  

We believe it implies two main lines of action. The first one, just mentioned, to 
guarantee access to the market / contestability and the second one, to prevent 
antitrust infringement that would hinder competition in the market.   

We understand that to guarantee contestability means making it possible that the 
undertaking leading a market may be substituted for another company (already 
operating in the market or a new entrant).  

Such  change  is  only  possible  if  both  supply  and  demand  sides  are  working 
properly. As per the supply, competitors should have a chance to become better 
than the undertaking leading the market and, as per the demand side (i.e. final 
users)  the  change  of  the  service  providers  should  be  possible  (no  relevant 
switching  costs)  and  users  should  be  able  to  appreciate  the  quality  of  such 
products  /  services  (should  have  an  incentive  to  make  the  change  from  one 
service provider to another).      

This simple description gets quite complex in digital markets. As per the supply 
side, network effects (besides economies of scale and economies of scope) are 
particularly present. Network effects make the markets tend to a “winner takes it 
all situation” and contestability gets particularly difficult as, at least in some cases, 
data accumulation provides an advantage to those services based on AI (more 
data makes it possible a better algorithm learning) that is difficult to get reduced 
by  a  potential  new  entrant  to  the  market  that  does  not  have  such  previous 
accumulation  of  data  (perhaps  this  is  the  reason  why  Google  is  paying  a  vast 
amount of money to be the default search engine for example on IOS devices).In 
view of this situation, it becomes key that data ownership and control remains in 
the hands of the users8, so that they could decide to give access to all past data 
extracted from them to new competitors.       

In relation to the demand side, things are also particularly complex in the digital 
environment. The main reason is that there is a significant information asymmetry 
that makes it especially difficult for users to assess the quality of a given service. 
So,  it  is  not  a  question  whether  “Competition  is  just  a  click  away”  (and  so  no 
relevant switching costs) but more on whether users may have the incentives to 
change.  For  example,  if  they  do  not  perceive  that  the  quality  of  the  service  is 
diminishing in terms of their privacy rights they may not even consider a change. 
Besides,  even  though  competition  may  effectively  be  just  a  click  away  and  so 

8 We believe the best mechanism to be the one suggested by the EDPS: Personal Information 
Management System (PIMS): Opinion 9/2016. "EDPS Opinion on Personal Information Management 
Systems. Towards more user empowerment in managing and processing personal data” 

3 

 
 
 
 
                                                           
there  may  not  be  relevant  switching  costs  as  were  traditionally  conceived,  it 
should also be taken into account that the existence of network effects may also 
make  it  difficult  such  change  (for  example,  if  I  am  using  whatsapp  and  all  my 
family and friends are using it, to change to a different messaging service would 
entail  not  being  able  to  be  in  touch  with  them).  So,  to  make  it  really  possible 
changes from the demand side, first of all it is necessary that users perceive the 
quality and, secondly, there is service interoperability in place so that there are 
no switching costs related to networks effects.    

Ex  ante  intervention,  is  also  aimed  at  preventing  competition  restrictions  from 
taking place. This ex ante intervention should encompass the following actions 
(at least to be considered):    

  To scrutinize all mergers carried out by relevant undertakings to avoid the so-
called “killer acquisitions”. There is a higher risk of such “killing acquisitions” 
since some digitally relevant undertakings have more information on future 
competitors than relevant undertakings have in the offline world.  

The study of such digital mergers should also be different. First of all the risk in 
terms of competition that digital merger poses are superior than offline mergers. 
As already explained, we believe those digital undertakings experience strong 
network effects and markets tend to a winner takes it all structure. Therefore, 
we believe it is advisable to reverse the burden of proof. In fact, we suggested it 
4 years ago9. 

This suggestion have also positive implications when we are facing mergers 
explained by the data acquisition it entails. Data can be used in many different 
markets and, consequently, it is nearly impossible for antitrust authorities to 
foresee all possible future markets affected. It would make more sense that the 
undertakings interested in the merge explained what are the intended future 
usage of such data and the merger being only eventually approved in relation to 
the market described by the merging parties.     

  It is also quite common that competition is hampered by relevant undertakings 
through subsidizing one particularly unit of its big structure. We believe a “fair 
play” code of conduct (like in soccer) so that units should be always financially 
independent.  

  Another infringing behaviours in digital markets are those dubbed as “self-

preferencing“, when a relevant platform (gatekeeper) tends to favour its own 
subsidiary that also is selling products or offering services through the same 
platform. To reduce the risk of this behaviour taking place, it could be eventually 
even considered the possibility to impose a structural separation.  

9 http://acco.gencat.cat/web/.content/80_acco/documents/arxius/actuacions/Eco-Dades-i-Competencia-ACCO-
angles.pdf 

4 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
ANTITRUST  AUTHORITIES  EX  POST  REACTION  TO  ANTITRUST 
INFRINGEMENTS  

Preliminary it has to be noted that in the digital markets, antitrust infringement are more 
difficult to be detected. Therefore, it is crucial that antitrust bodies have a privileged 
access to data (so that we would not be facing anti-scraping techniques) and all human 
and material resources to make use of such data and AI techniques to sharpen our 
detection capabilities in relation to the digital market.  

It could also be studied the possibility to reward those claimants that file a claim that 
finally leads to a final judgement stating the existence of a competition infringement. 

Taking into account how difficult it is to detect such infringements it is more than 
possible that there is some delay between the infringement taking place and the 
antitrust authority knowing it.  

So, this circumstance coupled with the fact that digital markets evolve rapidly (and the 
risk that the market tips) requires a quick reaction by antitrust authorities.   

Unfortunately, not even interim measures make it possible the quick reaction that is 
needed. Applying them requires not only the fumus boni iuris but also the periculum in 
mora notion, which is so strict that it means it is non-applicable to most of the matters. 
Perhaps this strict interpretation should be much more flexible precisely taking into 
account that digital markets evolve particularly fast and that there are network effects 
and the possibility that a market tips that would be extremely difficult to reverse. 

Also paired with the difficulty of detection described and the potential damages a 
competition infringement may cause in the digital markets, the amount of fines to be 
imposed should be revisited to make them higher. Otherwise it will not be possible to 
achieve a minimum deterrence effect. The probability of infringement detection should 
be inversely correlated to determine the sum of the fine.  

ANTITRUST AUTHORITIES: A NEW WAY OF WORKING   

Competition authorities should strengthen their permeability.  

Digital markets pose a magnificent challenge that requires that competition authorities 
receive all possible help from each other, but also from the whole society (for example, 
universities) and, obviously from other administrative bodies that are particularly 
relevant in the digital scenario, such as data protection authorities.   

The former EDPS Mr. Buttarelli and his team, started the Digital Clearinghouse 
initiative which is precisely a forum to strengthen cooperation between data protection, 
consumer protection and competition authorities10. In the framework of one of the 
Digital Clearinghouse sessions we submitted a brief paper on the possibility that some 
data protection infringements could also be antitrust infringements so that the 

10 https://edps.europa.eu/data-protection/our-work/subjects/big-data-digital-clearinghouse_en 

5 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
cooperation could not only be restricted to providing and receiving assistance but also 
have material implications11.   

It has also been suggested the possibility to create a Digital Regulator (in the UK, 
Digital Markets Unit) to execute all ex ante activity. However, we believe that antitrust 
authorities are particularly well suited for assuming such task as Digital regulation will 
have a primarily goal which is precisely to preserve the proper functioning of markets in 
terms of competition. Besides, a digital regulation would be a transversal regulation 
such as competition, and competition authorities enjoy also independence which is also 
a requirement a Digital Regulator should necessary fulfil.   

Finally, in terms of geographical tasks distributions, we consider that the response 
should include all layers (from European dimension, to state, to regional). Main reason 
is that the digital activity is not harmless for the brick and mortar world. On the contrary, 
we are all well aware that some accommodation or hail service platforms do produce 
significant effects in our cities.  

In fact, we believe that regulation12 should address such externalities and should be 
GLOCAL (i.e. establish a common framework/approach but at the same offering the 
possibility to regional/local administrations to fine tune such general approach in view 
of their specific situation). Externalities may greatly differ between different cities.   

Therefore, to monitor the implementation of such regulation, it would be advisable the 
intervention at different geographical levels which necessary would include 
regional/local ones. 

11 http://acco.gencat.cat/web/.content/80_acco/documents/arxius/actuacions/20180130_Long-Term-Impact-of-Big-Tech-
Sector-Mergers-2.pdf 
12 Regulation should also make use of the technological capabilities. It should be, as Mr. Xavier Puig (one of our 
employee’s put it) “modern”. Regulation should be tailored in different dimensions including time and space. 
http://acco.gencat.cat/web/.content/80_acco/documents/arxius/actuacions/20180622-Modern-Regulation-Xavier-Puig-
2nd-submission.pdf   

6 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
