Ref. Ares(2020)4625230 - 05/09/2020

Statement 

on the European Commission’s initiatives for a  

New Competition-law tool 

and the  

Digital Services Act package 

4 September 2020 

1. 

2. 

Some large online platforms have reached gatekeeper positions in the In-
ternet. For instance, websites need the services of Google Search to be 
found on the Internet. Another example are online advertisements, which 
are only widely visible when they are marketed through online platforms 
such as Google Ads.  

The importance of online platforms as gatekeepers in the Internet is com-
parable to the importance of network carriers for accessing the Internet. 
Network carriers are regulated by authorities. This suggests to subject pow-
erful online platforms to regulatory authorities, too.  

However, online platforms and network carriers differ in important ways. 
The largest network carriers have achieved their market positions through 
state monopolies. Online platforms with gatekeeper positions, however, 
have achieved their positions by competition and superior products.  

Under traditional economic doctrine, reaching a dominant position by 
means of competition should not be sanctioned or stopped. This could dis-
courage other companies from investing to reach a dominant position, too.  

This argument assumes that the economic benefits from those other com-
panies’ pursuit of a dominant position (or more precisely: their incentive 
from the dominant company’s position being unassailable by competition 
law) exceeds damage from the dominant position of that company which 
has actually achieved it. When online platforms reach great importance not 
only on their markets but for major parts of the economy, this assumption 
could prove wrong.  

3. 

The markets of online platforms could require a different approach than un-
der traditional economic doctrine. In the past 20 years, these markets have 

1│4 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
proven tipping-prone in their early stages: One or two online platforms pre-
vail, and the others are pushed out. The online platforms’ markets have 
also proven very stable in the stage of dominance. In most cases, the in-
cumbent’s position could not be challenged successfully any more.  

This raises the question whether attempts to achieve a dominant position 
by means of competition should be considered harmful on the online plat-
forms’ markets. If this question is answered positively, new competition-law 
tools are necessary because the existing tools are based on traditional eco-
nomic doctrine. They cannot prohibit or prevent pursuing a dominant posi-
tion.  

New competition-law tools would have to be developed which allow for in-
tervention before a dominant position is established. Or they have to modify 
the market environment so that a dominant position cannot be established 
or remains challengeable.  

Aside intervention before dominance, a major hurdle in the existing toolbox 
is proving dominance. Online platforms’ actions are mostly unilateral and 
thus can only be tackled by means of today’s competition law if the online 
platform is proven to be dominant in the relevant market or to transfer dom-
inance into the relevant market. This is unsatisfactory for several reasons: 
First, a major online platform may use resources which are not directly re-
lated to the concerned market. Existing competition law on dominance 
hardly can deal with that. Second, proving dominance takes great re-
sources from competition authorities. Accordingly, it limits the number of 
cases they can handle. Third, market players often cannot prove domi-
nance because they have no access to the required information. Therefore, 
market players often cannot tackle abusive conduct of online platforms by 
means of private enforcement.  

For these reasons, new competition-law tools should not be based on dom-
inance but on the role, online platforms take in the markets.  

4. 

Online platforms may try to make their customers dependent. A means 
could be transferring know-how from the customer to the online platform. A 
powerful online platform may be in the position to force its customers into 
accepting that it takes over commercial decisions from the customer. When 
the online platform takes over decision making from the customer, the 
online platform will gain know-how. The customer, however, will lose know-
how. He will increasingly become dependent on the online platform’s deci-
sions. And he will be less and less able to switch to another service pro-
vider. 

The online platform may not even have to force the customer to transfer 
commercial decisions. Large online platforms make great investments into 
artificial intelligence (AI) to improve their products. Their AI is meant to 

2│4 

 
 
 
 
 
 
make better decisions for the customers than the customers could make 
themselves. In such cases, customers may transfer decision making volun-
tarily to the online platform. The result is the same as above, the customer 
will become more and more dependent on the online platform, and the 
transfer of decision making my become irreversible.  

This is another issue traditional economic doctrine has problems to deal 
with. The online platform’s offer to let its AI make decisions for the cus-
tomer is an offer made subject to competition and in a market environment. 
A highly developed AI is a result of innovation competition and a product 
which customers choose for its superior functions. And that is in line with 
the goals of competition policy under traditional economic doctrine. Yet, it 
may result in irreversible dependence and a loss of competition in the long 
run.  

In the end, this may be reduced to the core question if improving 
knowledge and innovation are beneficial regardless of their distribution 
(possibly even lying in the hands of a single entity) or if it is preferable to 
have less knowledge and innovation overall but more evenly distributed.  

Another example for transferring know-how from the customer to the plat-
form is taking over the purchasing process from the retailer. The platform 
gains direct access to the customer and the retailer loses it. The platform 
gets to know the customer and his habits and preferences, and the retailer 
is alienated from the customer.  

Therefore, dominant online platforms should at least be required not to 
“bundle” their services with the transfer of commercial decisions and pur-
chasing process. Users should be able to choose if they use the service 
making their own decisions and processing the purchase on their own or 
transferring that to the online platform. Competition law would need appro-
priate tools to ensure that.  

5. 

The extreme growth of some online platforms results to a significant extent 
from using content of customers and third parties without remuneration. 
The online platforms use this content for their own business purposes. 
Sometimes, they even use no-cost content of customers to provide ser-
vices to these customers’ competitors. This cost-free approach makes their 
businesses very scalable and fuels their extreme growth.  

One example are customers of the online marketplace Amazon who have 
to share the site for a certain product. The first customer has to furnish the 
site with information and pictures. Another customer may join the site and 
offer a lower price; then, Amazon advertises primarily this customer’s offer 
on the product site. This customer can freeride on the first customer’s in-
vestment, and Amazon profits, too.  

3│4 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Another example are customers of Google Shopping. They have to accept 
that Google Shopping uses their product pictures to advertise their compet-
itors’ offers if they provide the better picture and the competitor offers a 
lower price – or, in Google Shopping’s default display mode, pays Google a 
higher price for top listing.  

Such use of content for services provided to competitors stifles non-price 
competition. Customers have no incentive to invest into the product site. 
And users of the market place receive less information and information of 
poorer quality on the product.  

Online platforms also try to shift legal responsibility for content on their plat-
form to their customers and third parties who (have to) provide the content. 
This discourages customers from providing content, too, at least when they 
are not adequately remunerated for taking the risk.  

Therefore, one way to limit the power of online platforms may be prohibiting 
to tap into customers’ assets without remuneration, especially where the 
platform uses customers’ assets to provide services to their competitors. 
New rules should entitle customers to a fair remuneration. The new rules 
should be mandatory. Else, the online platforms would use their massive 
bargaining power to exclude these rules by contract.  

6. 

Today, the forecast horizon of competition law is limited to a few years. 
Some assume, that online platforms pursue strategies for consolidated 
dominance over a much longer period.  

One example are investments in AI which take much longer to turn into 
marketable products. It is even believed that AI strategies aim at creating 
advantages across markets so that the online platform can reach a domi-
nant position on a new market more easily.  

Amazon is accused of foregoing profits in favour of investing the money 
into aggressive pricing – to achieve a consolidated dominant position in the 
long run and to transfer it into a return on investment through monopoly re-
turns (and possibly behavioural pricing).  

The forecast horizon of competition law should be more flexible so that it is 
able to adapt to the concerned markets and players and to deal with such 
long-term strategies.  

* 

* 

* 

4│4 

 
 
 
 
 
 
