The  Malta  Communications  Authority’s  rationale  for  its  responses  to  the 
European  Commission’s  consultations  on  the  Digital  Services  Act  and  the  New 
Competition Tool  

The Malta Communications Authority (MCA) welcomes the European Commission’s consultation on the 
Digital Services Act package launched last June which aims at (i) proposing new and revised rules to deepen 
the single market for digital services and (ii) having ex-ante rules to ensure that markets remain fair and 
contestable for stakeholders. It also welcomes the Commission’s consultation about a new competition 
tool,  which  if  implemented,  could  allow  it  to  impose  behavioural  and  structural  remedies  on  online 
platforms and possibly other sectors. For the of this note and the formal submission to the consultation, 
the MCA is focusing on digital platforms rather than just online platforms. In this case, digital platforms 
would also include platforms that do not strictly provide online services, but which may still control and 
influence access to them (e.g. operating systems).  

The MCA recognizes the economic benefits of digital platforms, however, it is also aware that the digital 
environment may indeed present scenarios where large digital platforms act as gatekeepers, given the 
structural nature of markets where these platforms are present and their ability to implement potentially 
unfair contractual terms and unfair practices at the expense of consumers and businesses.  

The  MCA  therefore  acknowledges  the  perceived  competition  problems  attributed  to  the  digital 
environment.  To  this  effect,  the  MCA  would  be  amenable  to  a  possible  new  EU  ex-ante  regulatory 
framework  for  digital  platforms,  aimed  to  address  behavioural  and  structural  concerns  that  could 
potentially be raised by large digital platforms in the digital sphere.   

The MCA considers that the regulatory oversight of digital and online platforms should mirror the ex-ante 
regulatory  oversight  that  is  currently  in  place  for  telecoms.  This  means  that  an  ex-ante  regulatory 
framework for large digital platforms and the corresponding rationale for regulatory intervention should 
rest  on  the  well-understood  concept  of  dominance.  The  dominance  concept  is  underscored  by  the 
requirement  on  National Regulatory  Authorities  (NRAs)  to  gather  robust  evidence  of  potential market 
failure before actually arriving at a decision to implement ex-ante regulatory measures.   

The dominance test needs to be well-defined, carried out within the parameters of quantifiable criteria of 
market power and supplemented with key indicators on aspects such as economies of scale and scope, 
data advantages, network effects etc. These quantifiable criteria could then also set the benchmark for 
the  implementation  of  a  general  streamlined  economic  and  competition  model  that  can  apply  across 
different national or specific circumstances. Such an approach would guarantee a clearly set threshold of 
intervention that offers certainty and clarity to market players and the industry in general.  

1 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The MCA is also of the opinion that a proposal for an ex-ante regulatory framework should make way for 
both economic and societal objectives, namely competition enhancement, innovation, protection of end-
users’ rights, and security in an open digital environment.  

As for the regulatory intervention and the remedies per se, the MCA acknowledges that potentially the 
best  option  would  entail  a  combination  of  principle-based  obligations  /  prohibitions  and  the 
implementation of data-driven regulatory tools. This is subject to having the necessary safeguards in place 
to ensure that regulation is only proportionally implemented where actually required.  

On the institutional design the MCA sees the validity of having a robust coordinative effort at EU level to 
address concerns raised by large digital platforms. In any case, EU Member States should always retain 
discretionary  power  to  designate  the  competent  national  regulatory  body  to  deal  with  competition 
shortcomings in the digital environment.  

The MCA considers that a robust ex-ante regulatory framework would go a long way in addressing most 
structural competition issues. So, it would be better that such a framework is sufficiently robust to address 
all structural competition issues, rather than setting a New Competition Tool that risks overlapping with 
the ex-ante regulatory framework and other regulatory tools. However, the MCA does acknowledge that 
the New Competition Tool, if implemented by competent regulatory authorities, could potentially serve 
as a safety net in exceptional cases or what may be referred to as regulatory blind spots.  In such case(s), 
utmost  attention  would  need  to  be  paid  to  potential  regulatory  overlaps,  in  order  to  avoid  legal 
uncertainty and potential negative implications for current  and future  investment. In this regard, legal 
certainty could be achieved via the adherence to the lex specialis principle, whereby the ex-ante regulatory 
framework for any sector remains the applicable legislation to address competition and societal aspects, 
whilst  any  form  of  New  Competition  Tool  would  serve  as  a  complementary  tool  aimed  to  address 
exceptional issues and outcomes that classify as ‘blind spots’ under sectorial regulation.  

2 

 
 
 
 
 
 
