Questionnaire for the Public Consultation 
on a New Competition Tool 

Google’s submission 

1 

 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table of contents 

SECTION 1: Overview

Introduction

C. Structural Competition Problems

D. Assessment of Policy Options

E. Institutional Set-Up of a New Competition Tool

F. Conclusion

SECTION 2: Questionnaire

C. Structural Competition Problems

D. Assessment of Policy Options

E. Institutional Set-Up of a New Competition Tool

F. Concluding Questions

3 

3 

5 

2​0 

3​0 

33 

35 

36 

6​8 

7​6 

8​1 

2 

 
 
 
 
 
SECTION 1: Overview 

Introduction 

Google welcomes the opportunity to continue to engage with the European Commission
concerning the possible ex ante regulation of platforms and the new competition tool
(NCT). Google set out its initial views in respect of both instruments in its ​response to the
Initial Impact Assessment (IIA) on June 30, 2020​.  

In this document, Google responds to the Commission’s ‘Questionnaire for the public
consultation on a New Competition Tool’. It should be read alongside Google’s response to
the open public consultation regarding the Digital Services Act package and
cross-references to that response are set out below where appropriate.  

Google believes that there are opportunities for modernisation of the EU competition law
framework. The proposed Digital Services Act and NCT have a role to play in that
modernisation if properly designed and implemented. 

In this response, we build upon the matters set out in our response to the IIA. We focus on
the areas where the available evidence (from, e.g. regulatory practice, academic research
and market developments) supports a measured, case-by-case approach to intervention.
While recognising the ambition to impose significant, market-shifting regulatory changes,
we recommend combining this ambition with an awareness of the costs and benefits of
intervention. 

We understand concerns that digitisation and market changes have challenged the ability
of the existing competition framework to maintain competitive markets, and that there
may be scope to modernise that framework. Some of the Commission’s concerns are likely
to fall within the scope of Articles 101 and/or 102 TFEU, though we have also identified
additional areas that an NCT could address. To ensure more robust enforcement, we
tools and procedures to allow
would also encourage adapting existing antitrust
assessments to be carried out more swiftly and effectively. This could be achieved, for
example, through organisational and procedural changes that enable more efficient (and
shorter) proceedings. Where needed, antitrust investigations could be fortified by
targeted use of interim measures. 

Google is particularly keen to ensure that regulation preserves the flexibility required to
accommodate the dynamic and rapid evolution of the digital economy, while being
targeted to areas where there have been shown to be material enforcement gaps. Our
objective is to support the Commission to identify targeted, proportionate approaches for
tackling specific concerns, while avoiding blanket new prohibitions and overlapping
regulatory frameworks that would limit economically and socially beneficial innovation.  

Google is committed to on-going innovation that delivers benefits to all users of Google’s
ecosystem: including both consumers and companies who utilise Google’s products to
serve the ever-changing needs of their own consumer base. As examples of ​the

3 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
pro-competitive innovation that we have been able to develop and deploy within the
current landscape: 

● In a number of EU countries Google is currently testing changes to its search
results to provide third party vertical search services with enhanced visibility via
choice carousels.
​These choice carousels list search services above specialised
results for flights, hotels, local businesses, and jobs. In these carousels, Google
shows links to search services, together with logos or images,
in a scrollable
horizontal row. These carousels give users additional choices without depriving
them of the benefits of specialised results.  

● Alongside its Chrome web browser, Google develops and maintains its Chromium
open source offering. A ​broad range of developers use Chromium to design their
own web-browsing capabilities​. ​Not only is it utilised by established technology
companies such as Microsoft (to power its Edge and Opera browsers) and Amazon
(for its Silk browser), but it also provides a valuable platform for a broad range of
innovative start-ups. Such firms offer products which plug market gaps and meet
ever-changing user needs without having to incur the material investment costs
involved in building a web browser from scratch. 

These are only some examples of the pro-competitive innovation that large online
platforms like Google have been able to develop and deploy within the current landscape.
The coronavirus pandemic has encouraged thousands of EU businesses to accelerate their
push towards digitalisation. This will only encourage further innovation; innovation we say
the Commission should seek to protect. In that context, it is even more critical that the
regulatory framework allows both for competition on the merits and for the rapid
development of innovative services that can support this digitalisation​.We look forward to
continuing our constructive engagement with the Commission and would welcome the
opportunity to comment on draft legislation.  

The remainder of this response tracks the structure of the Commission’s questionnaire,
though we have grouped together questions which address common themes to avoid
duplication.  

Questions 1-5: Background information 

Questions 1-5 request background on the respondent, including the extent to which the
respondent provides digital goods or services and the extent to which it relies on online
platforms. 

technology company, headquartered in Mountain View
Google is a multinational
(California, USA), active in a wide range of product areas including, for example, online
advertising technology,
internet search, cloud computing, software, and hardware. As
regards digital goods or services, Google is involved in the following activities identified at
question 4 of the consultation: the operation of an app store; the development and
provision of apps; the provision of a search engine; the provision of an operating system;

4 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the provision of network and/or data infrastructure/cloud services; and the provision of
digital identity services.  

C. Structural Competition Problems 

Questions 6-19: defining structural competition problems 

Questions 6-19 seek views on the extent to which certain market features can contribute
to structural competition problems / certain market scenarios can be described as
structural competition problems.  

Questions 8 through 19 set out more detailed questions on the following features /
market structures / conduct, asking questions regarding the prevalence of such
features, the markets in which they arise, examples of them having arisen, and the
extent to which the existing competition tools can effectively address them: 

● Companies with market power extending their market position into related markets

(Qs 8-9) 

● ‘Anti-competitive monopolisation’,

including the imposition of unfair business

practices or limiting access to key inputs such as data (Qs 10-11) 

● Oligopolistic markets / tacit coordination (Qs 12-13) 

● The use of pricing algorithms to align prices (particularly retail prices) (Qs 14-15) 

● Tipping / ‘winner takes most’ markets (Qs 16-17) 

● The presence of ‘gatekeepers’ (Qs 18-19) 

Key messages: 

● The Commission posits a broad list of market features and types of conduct that
may constitute, or contribute to, structural competition problems. Depending on
the circumstances, these can give rise to pro-competitive, anti-competitive or
competition neutral results. 

● Historic competition policy debates (e.g. regarding the so-called ‘efficiency
offence’ in merger control or the treatment of ‘patent pools’ under Article 101
TFEU) demonstrate the need for case-by-case analysis where it
is not
immediately apparent whether the conduct in question is good or bad for
competition, as here. 

● The question of whether the proposed NCT is an appropriate tool to address the
issues identified by the Commission, and whether there is a gap in the existing
Each category
antitrust rules, turns on the specific conduct in question.

5 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
identified by the Commission is assessed separately below.  

The various market features and types of conduct identified by the Commission in Qs 6
and 7 of
the consultation, depending on the circumstances, can give rise to
pro-competitive, anti-competitive or competitively neutral results. Accordingly, these
lend themselves to ​per se rules: only
features and types of conduct do not
evidence-driven case-by-case assessments,
including where appropriate detailed
economic modelling, can help determine whether such market features/types of conduct
will lead to anti-competitive results.  

For example, in the period leading up to the introduction of the 2004 Merger Regulation,
there was debate as to the treatment of efficiencies in EU merger control, and in particular
whether they were harmful to competition (as they could give large players scale and
efficiency advantages that could not be matched, ultimately leading to a loss of
competition) or pro-competitive (with merger-specific efficiencies serving to offset the
anti-competitive effect of potentially problematic transactions). Today, it is one of the
accepted principles of competition law that efficiencies are generally pro-competitive,
 1
both in merger control and under Article 101/102. However, this was not always the case.
Robust economic analysis was needed to inform the policy choice as to how to treat
efficiencies, not the other way around.  2

Indeed, in reference to digital platforms in particular, Alexiadis and de Streel noted in a
recent paper that ​“intervention is rendered even more complex because of the dynamic
nature of competition in relation to such markets and the need to weigh ambiguous
competing harms against potential distributional efficiencies, rather than reliance on the
usual more static models of competitive harm.”   3

The market scenarios posited in Q7 are considered in further detail below (Qs 8-9:
companies with market power extending their market position into related markets; Qs
10-11: anti-competitive monopolisation; Qs12-13: oligopolistic markets / tacit coordination;
Qs14-15: use of pricing algorithms to align prices; Qs 16-17: tipping / ‘winner takes most’
markets; and Qs 18-19: gatekeeper scenarios). 

Some of the Commission’s concerns are likely to fall within the scope of Articles 101 and/or
102 TFEU. Nevertheless, Google acknowledges that there may be opportunities for
modernisation and improvement within the existing EU competition law framework, and
that this may contribute to efficient and effective intervention.  

1 

2 

3 

The Competition Commissioner Mario Monti rebuffed the idea of the ‘efficiency offence’ in a ​speech in 2002​. 

For a further example, see the debate regarding the treatment of ‘patent pools’ - see, e.g., Competition and the
Industrial Challenge for the Digital Age, Jean Tirole, April 3, 2020. 
Alexiadis, P. and de Streel, Alexandre, ​Designing an EU Intervention Standard for Digital Platforms (February 26,
2020). Robert Schuman Centre for Advanced Studies Research Paper No. 2020/14. 

6 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Questions 8-9:Companies with market power extending their market position into
related markets 

Key messages: 

● This potential concern can, in principle, arise in all markets, not just those which
can be classified as ‘digital’ or ‘digitised’. The key question is the nature of the
entry/expansion and its impact on the market. 

● EU Court

​Microsoft​)

jurisprudence (e.g.

the key issue is
distinguishing between entry/expansion which delivers pro-competitive benefits
(e.g. Google’s map and weather results, as found by courts in England and Wales
and Germany respectively) and that which produces only anti-competitive
effects. Many cases will fall on a spectrum between the two. There is therefore a
need for case-by-case analysis. 

illustrates that

● Given the significant scope for positive or neutral effects for competition from
this type of conduct, the Commission should exercise great caution before
assigning any such conduct to a ‘blacklist’. 

Concerns about companies with market power extending dominance into new markets
should not necessarily be limited to digital markets, as the Commission’s and Courts’
decisional practice shows. The central issues are whether (1) the expansion into the new
market is achieved through competition on the merits (e.g. an improved product design)
or anticompetitive conduct (e.g. coercive tying, margin squeeze, refusal to supply an
indispensable input), and (2) the conduct causes anticompetitive foreclosure in the related
market.    4

Companies in the digital sector generally seek to offer innovative products to attract users
to their services. Entry and/or expansion in a related market by a company with or without
market power (whether as a one off or on a repeated basis) often results in product
improvements that benefit consumers and customers. There is nothing inherently
anti-competitive in offering a portfolio of complementary products. This can have material
benefits to customers (both end consumers and other businesses who may utilise a
portfolio of services from a third party to more effectively serve their own customers).  

At the same time, we understand that, in some cases, these practices may also involve
conduct that does not constitute competition on the merits and which forecloses efficient
rivals.  

4 

See, e.g. ​Commercial Solvents, Cases 6 and 7/73; Magill, Case C-241/91 P; ​Hilti​, Case C-53/92 P; Tetra Pak, Case
C-333/94 P; IMS Health, Case C-418/01; ​Michelin II, OJ [2002] L 143/1; ​Microsoft, Case T-201/04; ​Deutsche Telekom,
Case C-280-08 

7 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5
in ​Microsoft​,

For instance,
the General Court found that “​the Commission does not
interfere with Microsoft’s business model in so far as that model includes the integration of
a streaming media player in its client PC operating system or the possibility for that
operating system to allow software developers and Internet site creators to take
6
advantage of the benefits offered by the ‘stable and well-defined’ Windows platform​”.
In
other words, the General Court and the Commission were not impugning Microsoft’s
ability to introduce product improvements, including through vertical integration, to the
mutual benefit of Microsoft and its customers. The Court and the Commission did
however take issue with Microsoft making that improvement a “​de facto​” standard, rather
than offering a choice of its Windows operating system with and without its Media Player,
so as to “​stimulate innovation​”. Microsoft admitted that there was “​no technical reason​”
for the tie. Nor did it adduce satisfactory evidence that integration “​creates technical
efficiencies or, in other words, that it ‘lead[s] to superior technical product performance​”
8
so as to justify the lack of choice.
I.e. vertical integration based on ownership without
sufficient demonstrable benefits to customers falls outside of competition on the merits. 

7

Self-preferencing can be pro- or anti-competitive, depending on the circumstances and
the nature of
issue. There is a recognised risk that
self-preferencing can unfairly advantage companies’ own services at the expense of
efficient rivals without offering adequate countervailing benefits to customers. 

the self-preferencing at

At the same time, certain practices that could be described as ‘self-preferencing’ have led
to clear product improvements. For example, in ​Streetmap​, the High Court of England &
Wales ​found ​Google’s practice of showing a map thumbnail at the top of search results
pages to be “​procompetitive​” and an “​indisputable​” product improvement. Likewise, the
Hamburg District Court found that Google’s display of weather information at the top of
search results for weather queries served “​to increase the overall attractiveness of
[Google’s] search engine​”. This type of product integration creates a richer search
experience and offers more relevant information thereby saving people time, improving
discovery, and reducing search costs. 

the situation where a dominant company retains for

Similarly,
its own use a
non-indispensable asset, rather than sharing it with rivals, could be described as
self-preferencing. But it is well recognised that it is procompetitive for companies to
develop their own innovations, and use those innovations as the tools to compete against
one another. As Advocate General Jacobs explained in ​Bronner​: “​it is generally

5 

6 

7 

8 

Ibid​. 

Microsoft, para 1150.  

Microsoft, para 1151-1153.  

Microsoft, para 1159. 

8 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
pro-competitive and in the interest of consumers to allow a company to retain for its own
use facilities which it has developed for the purpose of its business.”  9

In previous competition assessments, the Commission has ​emphasized ​the need for
“​case-specific analysis to account for the specific characteristics of each market​”. Google
believes that the continuing complexity and diversity of digital business models reinforces
the importance of a case-specific approach to avoid significant unintended
consequences. On the one hand, instances of self-preferencing deserve close scrutiny to
ensure that competition and consumers are not being harmed; on the other hand, a
blanket approach could deny users the benefits of innovation and product improvements
without evidence that a corresponding harm is being addressed. 

Presumptions of illegality for platform integrations would apply across a category of
different firms, competing in different areas, engaged in many different forms of conduct.
This could have several unintended consequences: hampering vertical integration, which is
presumptively efficient; eliminating synergies; and leading to delayed or mothballed
product improvements. Accordingly, to find practicable and constructive solutions to
claims of unequal treatment, it’s important to avoid abstract and one-size-fits-all rules.   

Instead, concerns of unequal treatment should be assessed based on the facts of a
particular case. For example, the following questions may be relevant to the assessment
of a new product design: (i) Does the new design confer an undeserved advantage on the
company? (ii) Does the design improve quality and benefit consumers (and has the
company conducted testing to evidence the quality improvement)? (iii) Is the design a
separate product, or part of the main product offered to consumers? (iv) Does the design
restrict consumers from reaching rivals, or does it allow consumers to reach or choose
rival services? (v) What is the competitive significance of the design? 

Accordingly, a case-by-case assessment is always required to assess allegations about
companies with market power entering new markets. Thus, the mere fact that a company
may repeatedly enter new markets is not, of itself, problematic (contrary to the suggestion
in Q8). 

We acknowledge that currently the Commission cannot intervene either (i) where
non-dominant companies are engaging in potentially anti-competitive leveraging, or (ii) ​ex
ante where there is a sufficiently high risk of a dominant company engaging in such
conduct in the future, as such cases fall outside the scope of Article 102 (and, if there is no
agreement/concerted practice, are not caught by Article 101 either). There is, however, a
sound principled basis for the scope of Articles 101 and 102. The quasi-criminal nature of
any fines imposed means that a ‘bad act’ must have been committed prior to intervention
and in that sense the tools are ​ex post only. Similarly, there is a reason that Article 102 only
applies to dominant undertakings - the likelihood of unilateral conduct resulting in

9 

Case C-7/97, Opinion, para 57. 

9 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
anti-competitive outcomes increases with the degree of market power of the relevant
undertaking.   

Accordingly, in designing any new rules, the Commission should carefully consider how
such new rules could accommodate and facilitate the necessary case-specific analysis,
and how best to avoid anti-competitive outcomes without prohibiting or sanctioning
conduct that may be competitively neutral or even pro-competitive. The Commission
should also ensure that the NCT does not undermine the principles outlined above that
have led to the drawing of the boundaries of Articles 101/102. 

To the extent there are clear-cut examples of conduct where experience and/or empirical
evidence shows are inherently bad for competition, then it is conceivable that a
case-by-case analysis would not be required (whether under Articles 101/102 or an NCT)
and such types of conduct would lend themselves to being included in a list of per se
prohibitions. Examples of conduct where such treatment may be appropriate, as they do
not appear to have any pro-competitive rationale, may include product degradation
(predatory innovation, such as in​ ​Decca Navigator System​). 

Questions 10-11: ‘Anti-competitive monopolisation’ 

Key messages: 

● The Commission identifies two alleged practices, ‘unfair business practices’
and ‘limiting access to key inputs, such as data’ - each warrants separate
consideration. 

● The imposition of unfair business practices by dominant firms is expressly
in respect of platforms (and
prohibited by Article 102(a) TFEU, and,
irrespective of dominance) is addressed by the recent P2B Regulation. It
would be helpful as the Commission develops its proposals for the NCT for
the Commission to identify the alleged enforcement gap that case-by-case
assessment would address. 

● As regards access to key inputs, there may be areas where intervention could
have benefits outside of the narrow scope of the ‘refusal to supply’
jurisprudence under Article 102. But we caution against seeking to catalogue
these exhaustively in advance, rather than on a case-by-case basis. Google is
in particular supportive of measures to enhance data portability and
interoperability so as to facilitate consumer choice and drive competition.  

The Commission’s Q10 identifies a broad scope of conduct. Though we would agree that,
in principle, market situations can arise where one market player is able to put competitors
at an unfair disadvantage, we would urge a rigorous approach involving a careful,
case-by-case assessment of specific instances, rather than blanket categorisation of a
broad range of practices. 

10 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
In its Q10 the Commission identifies two alleged practices that it appears to consider
would be ‘anti-competitive monopolisation’. These are each very different and need to be
considered separately.  

‘Unfair business practices’ 

‘Unfair business practices’ is a potentially very broad category of behaviour. ​For the sake
of providing legal certainty and protecting innovation, we would stress the importance of
robust and consistent definitions of ‘fairness’ and evidence-based assessments of the
competitive effects of specific practices. In particular, we would caution against defining
‘unfairness’
in a way that discourages innovation aimed at improving user experience,
which can lead to a stronger market position. Our success in Search, for example, stems
from investments in innovative new search engine features that users value. The CMA for
example has surveyed both consumers and industry participants, acknowledging that
10
“​Google’s search results are generally perceived to be higher quality than those of Bing​”. 

In investigating instances of potentially unfair business practices, the Commission should
also be cognisant of whether the NCT will be the most appropriate tool. For example, both
Article 102, as Article 102(a) identifies as an abuse “​directly or indirectly imposing … unfair
trading conditions​”, and the existing P2B Regulation, which is targeted at addressing
unfair business practices, provide alternative mechanisms for intervention.  

11

‘Limiting access to key inputs, such as data’ 

There is a strong case for data use and sharing goals to be effectively and proportionately
pursued through existing means and collaborative efforts. Google has adopted an
approach that is open but respectful of users’ rights by making large-scale search datasets
publicly available for free (e.g., through the Google Trends and Natural Questions tools,
along with multiple other free and open source datasets). Though we are committed to
open systems, we believe that discussions on ‘limiting’ versus sharing data access need to
take account of the risks of any blanket data-sharing requirement to privacy and
incentives to invest. 

Article 102 provides an existing mechanism for companies to seek access to key inputs
such as data they need to be able to compete under the refusal to supply doctrine. We
note that to date, this doctrine has been interpreted narrowly, partly over concerns that
sharing obligations reduce competition and diminish incentives of both the company
subject to the obligation and the ones benefiting from it.

 12

10 

11 

12 

CMA market study: Online platforms and digital advertising​, para 3.35. 

And has been used by the Commission to sanction unfair trading conditions: see e.g. ​Tetra Pak​ and ​BRT​.  

​As AG Jacobs said in ​Bronner​: “​if access to a production, purchasing or distribution facility were allowed too easily
there would be no incentive for a competitor to develop competing facilities. Thus while competition was increased
in the short term it would be reduced in the long term. Moreover, the incentive for a dominant undertaking to invest
in efficient facilities would be reduced if its competitors were, upon request, able to share the benefits. 

11 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
As we noted in our response to the IIA, we also consider that competition between digital
platforms,
including through innovation, can be enhanced by measures that let users
switch and multi-home without losing access to their data (i.e. portability). In principle,
interoperability and data portability may be the solution to the Commission’s concerns
relating to access to key inputs, subject to the limitations / concerns outlined herein, in our
response to the DSA consultation and in our IIA response (e.g. the need to preserve
innovation and product quality, and to protect user privacy).  

As is apparent from the above, these are not clear cut issues and they require careful
case-by-case analysis to determine whether or not there is a potential concern and, if so,
how best to address such concern. The NCT could be a tool to facilitate and foster such
assessment.  

Questions 12-13: ‘Oligopolistic markets / tacit coordination’ 

Key messages: 

● In certain circumstances oligopolists may be able to behave in a parallel manner
driving anti-competitive outcomes without an agreement or concerted practice
falling within Article 101 and without satisfying the collective dominance test
under Article 102. The NCT could have a role to play in investigating, and where
appropriate intervening, in respect of such instances. 

● These concerns are not unique to digital platforms, and can also arise on both

sides of a platform as well as inter-platform.  

In some cases, oligopolists may be able to behave in a parallel manner and derive benefits
from their collective market power without necessarily entering into an anti-competitive
agreement or concerted practice.  

In Q12.3 the Commission lists a number of features that may in certain circumstances
contribute to the creation of oligopolistic markets. The analysis of whether this leads to a
substantial risk of tacit collusion will be fact-specific and requires a case-by-case analysis.
Additionally, the analysis must go beyond these factors. It is important to note that certain
markets may be most economically efficient with a small number of players, and this does
not automatically mean that there is a competition problem.  

The analysis of such markets must therefore progress beyond assessing whether an
oligopoly has formed or whether there are factors which may make an oligopoly likely in
the foreseeable future. This further analysis should focus on the likely outcome of that
actual or putative oligopoly on competition. The relevant factors here are well known in
competition analysis, e.g. is pricing competitive or is it maintained at supra-competitive
levels, do companies continue to innovate and introduce new products and features, can
competition be observed in practice e.g. through regular switching?  

12 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Whilst not unique to digital platforms, these concerns can arise on both sides of a platform
as well as inter-platform. Coordination to game the outcome of platforms’ offerings can
adversely impact consumers. A recent AdC ​investigation ​in Portugal has found that two
telecommunications services agreed to limit competition in advertising on the Google
search engine. We note that a key question in considering whether to intervene in respect
of such conduct will be whether it generates efficiencies that deliver benefits to
consumers.  

a

first

We acknowledge the need for the Commission to be able to intervene in oligopolistic
markets prone to tacit collusion in order to preserve/improve competition. However,
Articles 101 (through the concerted practices doctrine) and 102 (through collective
dominance) can already be used to address certain concerns of this nature. The
Commission should use these tools (including updating/issuing guidance) where possible
as
instances where
investigating/intervening with the NCT would be an appropriate means of conducting the
necessary case-by-case analysis. That analysis must both identify the presence or risk of
an oligopoly, and determine the nature of the competitive effects produced by that
market structure (which could be pro or anti-competitive, or competition neutral). Only
once these two questions have been answered can the Commission determine whether
intervention (under any tool) would be appropriate. 

carefully how to identify

and consider

step,

Questions 14-15: ‘Pricing algorithms’  

Key Messages: 

● In many cases, the use of pricing algorithms leading to anti-competitive effects

can be addressed under existing legislation, particularly Article 101 TFEU. 

● There are however instances outside of the existing rules, e.g. anti-competitive
effects driven by pricing algorithms but without an associated agreement or
concerted practice. The NCT could be deployed where these arise (which could
happen in any sector) using targeted, case-by-case assessment and intervention.  

13

We note that the report for the Commission “Competition Policy for the digital era”
referred to the “​intense academic discussion around the potential for pricing algorithms to
enable alignment of prices​.” The Furman review identified two main concerns, first ​“That
pricing algorithms might help make explicitly collusive agreements more stable, for
example by making it easier for businesses to automatically monitor the prices their
competitors are offering and detect when they deviate from the collusive agreement.”
Second, ​“That pricing algorithms could also lead to new forms of tacit collusion – where
there is no explicit agreement between businesses to collude, but where pricing algorithms

13 

J. Crémer, Y. de Montjoye, and H. Schweitzer, ​Competition Policy for the digital era: Final report​, March 2019.
Examples of academic works are Ezrachi and Stucke, Virtual Competition: The Promise and Perils of the
Algorithm-Driven Economy, November 2016; Calvano, Emilio and Calzolari, Giacomo and Denicolo, Vincenzo and
Pastorello, Sergio, ​Algorithmic Pricing: What Implications for Competition Policy?​ (July 7, 2018). 

13 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
effectively deliver the same result. At the extreme, pricing algorithms drawing on machine
learning technology could autonomously learn to collude.”  14

As the Commission has noted, to a large extent, pricing algorithms can be analysed by
 15
reference to the traditional reasoning and categories used in EU competition law.
Competition authorities have already dealt with cases on the first concern.
In a recent
joint report the French and German competition authorities concluded that ​“the existing
tools seem, at this stage, flexible in their application to cases involving algorithmic
behaviour.”  17

16

However, Article 101 would not apply if pricing algorithms produce price coordination
absent an agreement / concerted practice to that effect. To the extent that the
Commission could use a new tool to investigate such concerns, as we noted above in the
it would need to undertake a
context of oligopolistic markets / tacit coordination,
case-by-case analysis to determine whether this creates a problem by in fact reducing
price competition and thereby causing consumer harm. This is exemplified by the Webtaxi
case, where competition concerns arising from use of a pricing algorithm between
competitors were offset by enhanced efficiency.

 18

We note also that the distinction between whether the goods/services are digital or not
does not seem relevant to the use of pricing algorithms. 

Questions 16-17: ‘Tipping / winner takes most markets’  

Key messages: 

● Certain markets, in a variety of sectors, may be susceptible to consolidation in
in certain circumstances. Case-by-case
the hands of one larger player
assessment is required to identify the markets at risk and the factors which may
lead to ‘tipping’. 

● ‘Tipping’ could, in principle, occur absent a practice which is prohibited under
Articles 101/102, and an NCT may be an appropriate means of investigating this
issue.  

● Even where it can be established that a market has tipped or is at significant risk
of tipping, a variety of additional factors should be taken into account, such as
the scope for potential entry to serve as a competitive constraint, and the impact

14 

15 

16 

17 

18 

Unlocking digital competition​, Report of the Digital Competition Expert Panel (March 2019), ¶3.158. 

Algorithms and Collusion - Note from the European Union​, for OECD roundtable, 14 June 2017.  

E.g. CMA,
Luxembourg Competition Authority, ​Webtaxi​, 7 June 2018. 

​Online posters and frames​, September 2016; CJEU, Case C-74/14 ​Eturas​,

​ECLI:EU:C:2016:42​; and

Algorithms and Competition​, Joint study of
Bundeskartellamt, November 2019. 

the French Autorité de la concurrence and the German

Luxembourg Competition Authority, ​Webtaxi​, 7 June 2018. 

14 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of intervention on incentives to invest, before taking any enforcement action.  

Certain markets, in a variety of economic sectors and under certain circumstances, may
be susceptible to consolidation in the hands of one large player. However, as the authors
of the UK report “Unlocking Digital Competition” identified, ​“Digital markets vary greatly so
no general rules apply to all of them. But in many cases tipping can occur once a certain
scale is reached, driven by a combination of economies of scale and scope; network
externalities whether on the side of the consumer or seller;
integration of products,
services and hardware; behavioural limitations on the part of consumers for whom defaults
and prominence are very important; difficulty in raising capital; and the importance of
19
brands.​”   

A case-by-case analysis will thus be required to identify markets which are prone to
tipping, which market features may lead to tipping, and to determine whether, if so, they
would in fact tip and whether subsequent events such as technological developments or
market entry would reverse the impact. A strong market position does not preclude the
potential for new competitors to arise, as the threat of such competition “​keeps
incumbents on their toes​” and leads them to “​innovate to avoid being replaced​”.

 21

20

As identified in various reports such as those referenced above, tipping may occur due to
the factors listed by the Commission (network effects, economies of scale and
single-homing), and these factors may be present in some digital markets, the digital
sector is highly competitive with a vast number of companies and therefore tipping cannot
be said to be an inherent characteristic of  digital sectors/markets. 

In the digital economy, new technologies develop and marketplaces change quickly.  For
example, small companies can rapidly achieve a prominent position displacing incumbents
(e.g., despite only being released globally in 2018, TikTok is now one of the most
downloaded apps of the last decade and ranked in sixth place in the global mobile app
rankings by monthly active users for 2019).

23

22

The competition concerns relating to tipping may not be addressed fully by Article 101
(there is no agreement / concerted practice) and Article 102 (the firm(s) may not yet be

19 

20 

21 

22 

23 

Unlocking digital competition​, Report of the Digital Competition Expert Panel (March 2019), page 4. 

See, e..g, BKartA, B6-113/15, Working Paper – The Market Power of Platforms and Networks, June 2016 (​executive
summary​, and ​full paper​). The Bundeskartellamt’s analysis is in the context of assessing the market dominance of
digital platforms and networks, rather than tipping specifically. It examines in particular the relevance of direct and
indirect network effects, economies of scale, the prevailing types of use on the opposite market side
(single-homing/ multi-homing) and the degree of differentiation, access to data, and the innovation potential of
digital markets. 

Competition and the Industrial Challenge for the Digital Age, Jean Tirole, April 3, 2020. See also ​Federico, Giulio and
Scott Morton, Fiona M. and Shapiro, Carl, Antitrust and Innovation: Welcoming and Protecting Disruption (May 24,
2019). Available at SSRN​: ​https://ssrn.com/abstract=3393911​ or​ ​http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3393911​. 

See ​App Annie, ​A Look Back at the Top Apps and Games of the Decade​, 16 December 2019. 

See ​HootSuite, ​There Are More Social Media Users Today Than There Were People in 1971​, January 2020; and
AdWeek, ​App Annie: TikTok Was the Most-Downloaded App in Q1 2020​, 2 April 2020. 

15 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
dominant, and the concerns may not necessarily be an abuse). Thus there may be a case
for the Commission to intervene in some markets that it identifies are at risk of tipping in
cases where it may not be able to do so currently.  

Questions 18-19: ‘Gatekeepers’  

Key messages: 

● We caution against seeking to exhaustively identify specific gatekeepers or the
sectors / markets in which they may be present in advance. An evidence based
case-by-case approach should be adopted. 

● The factors which the Commission identifies in its questions as making markets
susceptible to gatekeepers or as the potential effects of the presence of a
gatekeeper may be relevant to varying degrees depending on the particular
industry and this may change over time.
It is not always clear whether such
effects lead to outcomes which enhance or hinder competition. Evidence based
is required, not only to determine whether a
case-by-case assessment
gatekeeper is present, but also to determine whether intervention is required and
if so what form it should take.   

● A package of complementary reforms (including enforcement of existing rules as
well as new legislative measures) may be an effective way of modernising the EU
competition regime including to address the Commission’s concerns regarding
‘gatekeepers’. A properly designed and implemented NCT could play an
important role in facilitating the evidence based assessment required to
determine the shape of that package. 

The Commission appears to consider gatekeepers as large online platforms driven by
strong economies of scale and direct and indirect network effects who increasingly act as
private gatekeepers to critical online activities for an exceptionally large population of
private and business users. As explained further in our response to the consultation on the
proposed Gatekeeper Regulation,
identifying which firms qualify as gatekeepers is a
complex exercise that requires further analysis.   

The advantage of the NCT, as the Commission appears to envisage it, is that it would be
flexible enough to investigate competition concerns in a market without needing to label a
if the
subset of platforms as ‘gatekeepers’. As we noted in our response to the IIA,
threshold in, for example an ex ante regulation, is that a platform is a ‘gatekeeper’, then the
Commission would need to consider carefully how to define ‘gatekeeper’ platforms in a
clear and certain way that is sufficiently future-proof. 

Further, we note that the mere presence of a ‘gatekeeper’ does not necessarily give rise to
competition concerns and may generate pro-competitive effects, which would need to be
taken into account in any analysis of the effect on competition. For example, whilst some
may label Google, Apple, Facebook, and/or Amazon as gatekeeper platforms, as we noted

16 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
in our response to the IIA these four companies are ​reported ​to be some of the largest
investors in R&D, as reflected in the ​2018 Global
​Google has
consistently spent ​over 15% of its revenues on R&D since 2016. By contrast, the ​average
‘R&D ratio’ in the EU is 3.4%​. 

Innovation 1000 study​.

The Commission’s concern in the digital sector appears to relate to “​some large online
platforms benefitting from significant network effects and acting as gatekeepers​”.
Nevertheless, the relevance of network effects, other factors, and countervailing factors
(multi-homing etc.), varies between markets, and therefore it would be difficult to
in digital sectors/markets. The
characterise gatekeeper scenarios as “common”
Commission should also be cautious in condemning network effects, which can create
virtuous cycles and encourage pro-competitive behaviour by the platform on both sides of
the market in certain circumstances. A case-by-case assessment is needed to identify a
to affect competition, and
gatekeeper,
pro-competitive benefits. App platforms, for example, though characterised by some as
‘gatekeepers’, have been widely recognised as driving innovation and growth in the app
economy. According to one ​study​, ​European consumers spent $5.2 billion on Google Play
in 2019, an 18.0% year-on-year increase. 

and incentives negatively

ability

its

24

The Commission’s approach to gatekeepers appears to date to be focused on “online
platforms” and thus to that extent the gatekeeper scenarios posited by the Commission
occur in digital markets. However we note that one side of a digital platform may be retail,
with digital being only one channel in a wider market(s). Also, there may be gatekeepers in
markets such as electronic communications, and more traditional essential facilities (e.g.
ports). Thus depending on the definition adopted, gatekeepers may not be limited to the
digital sector. 

Each of the factors posited by the Commission in Qs 18.7 and 18.9 may be relevant to
varying degrees in a particular industry, and this may change over time. In a recent Deloitte
report​, one EU developer described app platforms as offering “great opportunities, a
fantastic medium” for developers. As such a case-by-case analysis is required to identify
which companies may qualify as a gatekeeper in a particular market, and whether their role
as a gatekeeper gives rise to any potential competition problems.  

that

the Commission identifies competition concerns relating to
To the extent
gatekeepers, then we acknowledge that there may be an enforcement gap with respect to
existing competition law tools. Notably, in the context of Article 101 there may not be a
relevant agreement / concerted practice; and in the context of Article 102 either the
gatekeeper may not be dominant, or the behaviour at issue may not be an abuse. Thus
there may be a case for the Commission to intervene where it identifies competition
concerns arising from a firm being a ‘gatekeeper’.  

In this regard, the contemplated NCT could provide a useful way of better understanding
the relevant markets,
for more advanced
evidence-gathering and analysis, and addressing any market failures using flexible and

including through any

framework

24 

See, e.g.: ​http://faculty.haas.berkeley.edu/HERMALIN/armstrong.pdf​.  

17 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
creative remedies. The flexibility of the contemplated NCT may be particularly useful in the
context of gatekeepers given that a case-by-case analysis is required to identify any
competition concern, and balance these concerns against any pro-competitive benefits
from the platform under consideration.  

As we identified in our response to the IIA and expanded upon in our response to the
Digital Services Act consultation in respect of the proposed gatekeeper regulation, the
solution to the ‘gatekeeper’ concerns may comprise a package of complementary
reforms. New regulations could address issues that fall outside the scope of competition
law, but which are important for digital markets to function in a fair, efficient manner (e.g.,
ensuring data portability, appropriate levels of transparency, and fairness in contractual
relations).
It appears to us at this initial stage that some of these measures could be
important whatever the size or market position of the digital platform at issue. Similarly, as
one looks back at the unpredictable nature of historic innovation and tries to imagine what
kinds of digital products and services European consumers will be using in the future, it
seems reasonable to assume that notions of ‘gatekeeper’, ‘platform’, and even ‘digital’ will
need to be robust and flexible. The NCT could have a valuable role in any such package of
reforms, enabling evidence based case-by-case assessment where the object of the
Commission’s concerns falls outside the scope of existing (or future) ​ex ante​ regulation.  

Questions 20-23: sectoral scope of the NCT 

Questions 20-23 seek views on the sectors / markets which should be within scope of
the NCT (e.g. digital only or all) and specifically ask whether there are specific markets /
market situations in which structural competition problems have arisen which Articles
101/102 cannot sufficiently or effectively address. 

Key messages: 

● Whilst they may be present in certain digital markets, the structural competition
problems posited by the Commission are not necessarily limited to digital
markets. In keeping with the principle of the universality of EU competition law,
Google submits the NCT should apply to all sectors of the economy.  

● There may be areas where anti-competitive effects result from practices or
market scenarios which cannot be effectively addressed by the existing EU
competition legislation. However, assessing whether the existing tools are
applicable and which tool to deploy will require a case-by-case assessment. The
legislation should be flexible enough to allow this. 

Many of the factors relating to structural competition problems identified by the
Commission in its IIA related to digital markets. However, it is not necessarily the case that

18 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
structural risks for competition and structural
markets.  

lack of competition are limited to digital

Under the UK’s market investigation tool, which we understand to be an inspiration for the
NCT, ​“As well as being able to look into the conduct of firms, the [CMA] can probe for other
causes of possible [Adverse Effects on Competition], such as structural aspects of the
In its
market (including barriers to entry and expansion) or the conduct of customers.”
guidance on the tool, the CMA identifies a variety of structural features it has identified, in
a variety of markets.
The CMA has, by way of illustration, intervened in respect of the
supply of energy, retail banking services, airports and aggregates, amongst others.  

25

26

It is also a general principle of EU competition law that it applies universally, without regard
to the nationality of the company, its owners, or sector. As such, should the Commission
propose a narrow NCT, for example limited to digital markets, it should enunciate clearly
the basis on the reasons for excluding certain sectors, and consider carefully whether this
undermines the universal application of competition law. 

We note in this regard comments by Executive Vice President Vestager in a recent speech:
“Many of the biggest issues that this tool could help us resolve are linked to digital markets.
But I doubt that it would make sense to apply it only to these markets – instead of covering
the whole economy, as our existing competition powers do. That’s partly because the sort
of issues I’ve discussed come up in many other markets as well. In fact, the Greek, Icelandic
and British competition authorities have so far only used this type of power in markets that
aren’t digital. It’s also because the digital transition is affecting pretty much every industry
there is. So it’s hard to draw the line between what’s digital and what isn’t – especially when
you consider that the rules we come up with now should be ready for the future, when that
line may get even more blurred.” EVP Vestager has also commented that ​“Neutrality is a
guiding principle of everything we do. When we take our decisions, we have to follow
where the evidence and law lead us, and treat every business the same. However big or
small they are, and wherever they come from”​.

 28

27

We agree that on the basis of the concerns identified by the Commission there may be
opportunities to modernise the EU competition law framework. However in some
instances where existing competition law may be the appropriate tool. The Commission’s
assessment of which tool to use to address a particular problem in a particular sector
would require an evidence based, case-by-case assessment, and therefore the legislator
should be cautious of legislating in advance to limit a particular tool to markets/ sectors
with particular characteristics. 

25 

26 

27 

28 

Guidelines for market investigations: Their role, procedures, assessment and remedies​, April 2013, CC3 (Revised),
para. 19. 

Ibid​, paras. 157-158. 

“​Competition in a Digital Age: Changing Enforcement for Changing Times​”, ASCOLA Annual Conference, 26 June
2020. 

“​Protecting consumers from exploitation​”, Chillin’ Competition Conference, Brussels, 21 November 2016. 

19 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
D. Assessment of Policy Options 

Question 24 

Question 24 asks whether the NCT is needed.  

Key messages: 

● The contemplated NCT could provide a useful way of better understanding
markets,
advanced
evidence-gathering and analysis, and addressing any market failures using
flexible and creative remedies.  

for more

framework

including

through

any

● Case-by-case assessment of the evidence will remain core to identifying where
there is a departure from competition on the merits justifying intervention.  

● A range of measures could be adopted to enable more effective enforcement,
including enhancements to the existing antitrust rules and the use of a new tool
along the lines of the proposed NCT. 

Several of the proposals that are now under consideration by the Commission have the
potential to promote competition and innovation in the EEA. For example, we have long
supported enhanced data portability, which facilitates switching, multi-homing, and
provides opportunities for new players to enter or expand in digital markets. Providing
better access to aggregated datasets could benefit research and development in a range
of industries while also safeguarding user data privacy.  

The contemplated NCT could provide a useful way of better understanding markets,
including through any framework for more advanced evidence-gathering and analysis, and
addressing any market failures using flexible and creative remedies. It could also allow for
efficient consolidation of complaints, expedite evidence-based inquiry by including all
relevant market participants in an investigation.  

Evidence will continue to be core to the question of whether or not firms are competing on
the merits. For example, integration between different products or services can promote
or restrict competition. Our experience has been that telling the difference often requires
a detailed, case-by-case and fact-based assessment of the effects on consumer welfare.
It may, therefore, make more sense to adapt existing antitrust tools and procedures to
allow assessments to be carried out more swiftly and effectively. This could be achieved,
for example, through organisational and procedural changes that enable more efficient
(and shorter) proceedings, and by setting up specialised teams with the expertise to
assess complex technical matters. Where needed, antitrust investigations could be
(i) targeted use of interim measures; (ii) well-designed remedies; (iii)
fortified by:

20 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
intervention against specific, harmful forms of conduct (complemented by updated
guidance); and (iv) use of a new tool along the lines of the proposed NCT. 

Finally, we note that engaged dialogue between firms and regulators can lead to change,
outside formal investigations. For example, following discussions with the Commission,
Google launched choice carousels to enhance the visibility of rival search services and
provide additional choice for consumers. Google displays choice carousels that list third
party search services above specialised results for flights, hotels, local businesses, and
jobs. In these carousels, Google shows links to search services, together with logos or
in a scrollable horizontal row. These carousels give users additional choices
images,
without depriving them of the benefits of the specialised results:  

Feedback from services that appear in the carousel has been positive. Several services
have publicly highlighted the launches on Twitter accounts, including: ​La Fourchette ​in
France, which explained it was pleased to be one of the first to test the carousel;
Bookatable ​in Germany: ​Restaurantes.com ​in Spain; and ​Paginas Amarillas ​in Spain. Jobs
including ​Monster​,
sites have also been commenting on the launch in Germany,
Gigajob.com​, and​ ​Experteer.de​. 

Question 25 

Question 25 asks whether the NCT could be used to prevent structural competition
problems from arising and thus allow for early intervention in the markets concerned (i.e.
on an ex ante basis). 

Key messages: 

21 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
● The Commission contemplates using the NCT on ​ex ante basis, i.e. to identify and
address competition concerns where there is a structural​ risk​ to competition.  

● The NCT could be precisely the tool to deploy on an ​ex ante ​basis because it will
leading to ​ex ante

permit evidence driven case-by-case decision making,
interventions to prevent harm from arising only where justified.  

● Ex ante ​intervention to address structural risks to competition should be

accompanied by a suitable remedies framework, as discussed below. 

We understand that the Commission contemplates using the NCT both ​ex post​, i.e. to
identify and address competition concerns in a market with a structural
​lack of
competition, and also on an ​ex ante ​basis, i.e. to identify and address such concerns where
there is a structural ​risk​ to competition.  

When investigating ​ex ante ​risks, there is inherent uncertainty as to whether harm will arise,
in particular in fast-moving digital markets characterised by high levels of investment and
innovation. Accordingly,
such intervention should involve a case-by-case assessment
before any ​ex ante ​remedy (or indeed ​ex ante ​regulation) is put in place. Otherwise there is
a risk of chilling innovation to the detriment of consumers. Under existing case law, the
 29
Commission has to meet a high standard when intervening against prospective harms;
this can only be met through a case-by-case assessment. 

We thus consider that the contemplated NCT is a useful way of better understanding
markets,
including through a framework for more advanced evidence-gathering and
analysis. This makes the NCT the correct tool to conduct an assessment of markets where
there is a structural ​risk to competition, as it can consider the evidence on a case-by-case
basis before making ​ex ante ​interventions to avoid structural risks to competition
materialising into a structural lack of competition.  

We discuss the remedies framework further below but we note here that ​ex ante
intervention to address structural risks to competition should be accompanied by a
suitable remedies framework which allows measures which steer market developments
away from competition issues towards a more competitive outcome. For example,
following its ​retail banking market investigation ​the CMA implemented ‘​Open Banking’​, a
means of sharing consumer and SME banking data amongst providers using an API so as to
encourage entry and switching. Such interventions can allow markets to develop into more
competitive structures (or avoid developing into anti-competitive structures) without
further intervention including intrusive changes to existing market structures.  

Staged interventions can also be an effective means of tackling such issues - see our
discussion of the approach of the CMA in its “​Online platforms and digital advertising
market study​” in response to questions 30-32 below. 

29 

E.g. ​Tetra Laval ​and ​CK Telecoms​. 

22 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Questions 26-28: Scope of the NCT 

Questions 26-28 invite views on the scope of the NCT, specifically: the main structural
competition problems it should address; whether it should be ‘horizontal’ and apply to all
sectors or only to certain sectors; and whether it should require dominance as a
threshold for intervention. 

Key messages: 

● Structural competition problems are likely to vary between markets and evolve
over time. The design of the NCT should be flexible enough to account for this.  

● As such, setting dominance as a threshold for intervention raises the risk of the
NCT not being able to address structural (rather than firm-specific) competition
problems. Similarly, limiting the NCT to certain sectors or markets risks creating a
tool which lacks the flexibility to account for future market developments.  

● By contrast, a generally applicable NCT could provide the Commission with
sufficient flexibility to address structural and other competition-related issues. 

It is likely that structural concerns in markets will vary market-to-market, and may change
over time. Thus what may be important for competition in one market may not be
important for competition in another market. As such, flexibility and future proofing will be
important considerations in the design of a NCT. 

In terms of whether the NCT should be limited to dominant companies only, we note
Executive Vice President Vestager’s comments that ​“The rules we have today can’t stop
big companies from pushing markets towards the tipping point, unless those companies
are already dominant in a market. And that isn’t just an issue in digital markets. In the last
two decades, four-fifths of Europe’s industries have become more concentrated, with the
biggest companies taking an ever larger share of the market.”   30

We agree with this sentiment, and note that setting dominance as a threshold for
intervention raises the risk of the NCT not being able to address structural (rather than
firm-specific) competition problems. 

In terms of whether the NCT should apply to all or a limited category of markets, we
consider it a valid question as to whether legislation could identify sufficiently precisely the
sectors to be covered by the NCT in a way that can take account of future market
developments, particularly in fast-paced and technology-driven industries. By contrast, a
generally applicable NCT could provide the Commission with sufficient flexibility to
address structural and other competition-related issues. 

30 

Keeping the EU competitive in a green and digital world, College of Europe​, Bruges, 2 March 2020. 

23 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Question 29 

Question 29 asks how the NCT could smoothly interact with sector specific regulation. 

Key messages: 

● Minimising duplication between different tools is essential in order to enhance
legal certainty. This includes not only existing sector specific regulation, but also
equivalent tools at the Member State level, the current sector inquiry regime,
other EU legislation (e.g., Articles 101/102), and ex-ante regulation.  

● Done well, the creative application of different legislative instruments can be an

effective means of delivering positive change.   

In terms of how the NCT would interact with a range of existing rules and regulations, we
note that minimising duplication between different legislation is important so as to
enhance legal certainty. As we identified in our IIA response, some considerations
governing whether or not a new tool ought to be deployed may include: 

(1) EU vs national regimes: how the NCT will interact with equivalent tools at the Member
State level, the role of subsidiarity, the risk of conflicting outcomes, and whether a
‘one-stop-shop’ principle may be appropriate;  

(2) Interaction with the current sector inquiry regime: the Commission appears to envisage
the current EU sector inquiry regime continuing to exist in parallel. The Commission should
consider the basis on which it would choose between a sector inquiry or deploying the
NCT, and whether there is scope for formalising the interaction between the two tools;  

(3) Interaction with other EU legislation ( e.g., Article 101/102): the Commission posits that
the NCT will be used to address structural competition problems that cannot adequately
be addressed by the existing legislation. The consultation could therefore consider how
and at what stage in an investigation it will identify whether it is appropriate to proceed
with the NCT or other EU legislation (for example, one option would be to draw inspiration
from the UK market investigation regime, where the CMA’s guidance provides that it will
not make a market investigation reference where an investigation under the Competition
Act (containing the UK domestic equivalents of Articles 101 and 102) is more appropriate);
and 

(4) Interaction with ex ante regulation: the consultation could also consider how the NCT
and any ex ante regulation (including the new regulation discussed in this paper) will
In
interact and how it will design the overall regime so as to ensure legal certainty.
particular, to provide certainty and predictability for businesses, it will be important to

24 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
minimise overlaps so that companies do not have to confront multiple regulatory regimes
with the same aim. 

Done well, targeted enforcement combined with sector specific regulation can be an
effective means of delivering change. For example, following its retail banking market
investigation, the CMA imposed a requirement for certain UK retail banks to engage in
‘Open Banking’ (described above). The CMA proposed this remedy following the passage
of the Second Payment Services Directive (PSD2) but before the deadline for its domestic
implementation. PSD2 contains certain requirements which overlap with the Open Banking
remedy, requiring banks to give access to customer financial data to third party payment
providers (with customer consent). To ensure the coherent adoption of these two regimes,
the CMA proposed that the Open Banking ‘​Implementation Entity’ ​also have a role in
administering PSD2. The CMA also viewed the Open Banking remedy as complementing
PSD2 in other ways, e.g. the API required by Open Banking could also be used to comply
with PSD2. 

Questions 30-32 and 35-36: Remedies 

Questions 30-32 ask about the range of remedies that should be available under the
NCT: non-binding recommendations;
regulators;
legislative recommendations' imposition of behavioural / structural remedes, including
specifically whether there are circumstances in which only structural remedies can
effectively address structural competition problems.  

recommendations

to sectoral

Question 35 asks whether interim measures should be available to address irreparable
harm. 

Question 36 asks whether the Commission should be able to accept voluntary
commitments. 

Key messages: 

● Google would support the NCT being accompanied by a broad range of remedial
tools, to ensure that the remedy framework can effectively address structural
competition problems whilst preserving existing market dynamics to the extent
possible. 

● The applicable legal test and evidentiary standard should be calibrated in light of
the remedial tools which will be available, ensuring that measures requiring
significant intervention can only be imposed following a thorough, clearly
evidenced and well reasoned analysis. 

● The imposition of structural remedies should be seen as a weapon of last resort
and should follow a particularly rigorous analysis. Wherever possible, the
Commission should seek opportunities to allow less interventionist measures to

25 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
drive the necessary change. 

● Remedies should be able to evolve over time to reflect market developments.  

● Google is supportive of enabling the Commission to accept voluntary remedies,

as is the case in its Article 101/102 investigation. 

The NCT potentially applies to a broad range of market sectors and a broad range of
potential concerns. Further, as set out in response to Qs 27 and 28 above, Google would
support the NCT being adopted in the broadest form proposed by the Commission,
applying to all sectors of the economy and all markets in which structural competition
problems may be present, without requiring dominance as a threshold for intervention.  

Against that background, we support inclusion in the legislation of each of the four options
posited by the Commission in Q30, and, within the Commission’s ability to impose
remedies, the three options posited in Q31. An appropriate range of remedial tools is
important to ensuring that the remedy framework can effectively address structural
competition problems whilst also preserving existing market dynamics that do not
contribute to those problems, as we set out in our response to the IIA. I.e. in designing the
remedies framework the Commission should be guided by the principles of effectiveness,
proportionality and flexibility.  

As we explained in our response to the IIA, an important issue the Commission should
consider when designing the provisions which will permit it to impose remedies is the legal
test and evidentiary standard that will apply. When imposing remedies, precedents exist in
a number of regimes, for example the ‘Adverse Effect on Competition’ test applicable in
to Effective
the UK market
Competition’ test in the EU Merger Regulation. Both of these examples carry extensive
jurisprudence on both the legal test and the associated evidentiary standard. Google
would also support the adoption of flexible standards, with higher standards applicable for
stricter or more interventionist remedies. 

investigation regime, or

the ‘Significant

Impediment

Whilst we support the NCT being supported by a broad range of remedial tools, we
consider that it is important that those tools are utilised within the correct confines. Part of
this is satisfying the appropriate legal test as we note above. In addition, the Commission
should not use the NCT to introduce remedies (or a series of remedies) that better fall
within the purview of new legislation following the appropriate legislative procedure.
Seeking to address through antitrust enforcement matters which are better dealt with
through legislation can produce potentially prolonged periods of legal uncertainty and
poor outcomes.

 31

31 

As is for example illustrated by the series of Commission Decisions concerning interchange fees before the
adoption of the Interchange Fee Regulation.  

26 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The imposition of structural remedies should be a last resort following rigorous
analysis 

Structural remedies are potentially highly draconian and risk significant adverse effects on
incentives to invest and attendant chilling effects on innovation. They also risk unintended
consequences and potentially adverse future market developments (i.e. they risk
32
“​throwing the baby out with the bathwater​” ). This is particularly so in rapidly developing
sectors, as for example ‘digitised’ sectors typically are. If the target of a structural remedy
is not sufficiently stable, implementing it may carry costs that outweigh any benefits of
intervention. 

Accordingly, the imposition of structural remedies should be subject to a suitably high
legal threshold and evidentiary burden. The Commission should proceed cautiously, only
imposing structural remedies where it is satisfied that intervention is justified and no other
solution is available (including where appropriate pursuing other, less intrusive, remedial
measures first as outlined above).  

By way of illustration, in its market study into ​online platforms and digital advertising​, the
CMA discussed whether it would be appropriate to adopt certain structural remedies in
respect of Google’s activities in open display advertising (specifically ‘separation’
remedies: namely divestiture, operational separation or specific restrictions targeted at
conflicts of interest). The CMA ultimately concluded that it would not be appropriate to
seek to impose any ‘separation’ remedies, but that it would recommend that these powers
be made available to the new Digital Markets Unit (DMU). Two main factors drove this
conclusion.  

33

● First​, the CMA emphasised the need for further analysis and investigation, stating
that when considering the use of its separation powers it would be incumbent upon
the DMU to “​assess whether operational separate is sufficient, and if not, consider
ownership separation, balancing the costs of intervention with the benefits for
consumers through innovation and more effective competition​”. I.e. there are at
least two questions that should be asked before structural measures are imposed:
(1) is any less intrusive measure effective; and (2) if not, is a structural measure
proportionate.  

● Second​, the CMA noted that the relevant products and technology are “​likely to
change over time, and therefore the effectiveness of an ‘one-off’ intervention to
separate current activities is likely to be time-limited​”. I.e., particularly in dynamic
and fast moving markets, caution should be exercised before imposing structural
remedies given the increased difficulty in later reversing or adapting remedies to
take account of market developments.  

Google considers that the Commission should view this more recent analysis by the CMA
as instructive as to the role of structural remedies within the NCT, rather than the few

32 

33 

Competition and the Industrial Challenge for the Digital Age, Jean Tirole, April 3, 2020. 

A new body empowered to implement certain regulatory functions proposed by the CMA. 

27 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
historic market investigation cases where the CMA has imposed structural remedies. The
Commission should focus on first principles in establishing a remedies framework, rather
than potentially poorly analogous precedent.  

● First​, CMA market investigation decisions are taken by members of a panel of
independently appointed decision makers. Panel members are not formally
affiliated with the CMA and are not, for example, involved in forming the CMA’s
policy objectives. This structure provides an insulation from factors external to
specific cases (e.g. political factors) thereby acting as a safeguard for relevant
undertakings. Replicating this structure is not possible within the institutional
framework of the Commission and therefore it cannot be assumed that it is
appropriate for the Commission to fully replicate the powers available to the CMA
unless it can also implement additional procedural safeguards to compensate for
this institutional safeguard which cannot be recreated. 

● Second​, not only is the imposition of structural remedies following a CMA market
investigation rare, but the cases are highly fact specific. For instance, the CMA
imposed a package of divestment remedies following its ​market investigation into
UK airports​, requiring BAA plc to sell a number of London and Scotland based
airports. However,
it is important to note that BAA plc was a product of
privatisation and was formerly the state owned British Airports Authority. It was not
a company which had grown from the ground up as a commercial entity through
investment and innovation. The CMA did not, therefore, have to grapple with the
complex issues regarding the risk of chilling effects on innovation and investment
that it would face outside of that narrow case specific context. If the Commission
does incorporate the power for structural remedies within the NCT, it will be vital to
assess in depth the case-specific implications of any single decision, while adhering
to fundamental principles of only employing such remedies in a sparing and
proportionate way, on the basis of robust evidence.  

It is not possible to identify in advance structural competition problems that can only
be resolved by structural remedies (Q32) 

The result of the broad scope of the NCT, is that it would be applicable to a potentially very
broad range of structural competition problems. One virtue of a properly designed and
implemented NCT is that it will allow evidence driven case-by-case assessments of
potential structural competition problems and the measures, if any, required to remedy
such problems which may include, as a measure of last resort, structural remedies. We
accordingly caution against seeking to identify at the outset potential candidates for the
imposition of structural remedies.  

The Commission should consider and adopt a remedies framework which permits
remedies to evolve overtime 

The Commission should consider how to deploy the remedial tools at its disposal to adjust
the degree of intervention it adopts overtime so as to ensure that the appropriate balance

28 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
between addressing competitive harm and preserving non-problematic existing market
characteristics is consistently struck overtime. 

involve the Commission considering how to readily permit revision or
Part of this will
revocation of remedies. As we noted in response to the IIA, this will be of particular
importance in dynamic markets where market developments may render remedial
likely be scenarios where it is
measures no longer appropriate.
appropriate for the Commission to introduce remedies on a phased basis, beginning with
the least intrusive measures and giving such measures adequate opportunities to deliver
competitive change before introducing further measures. 

In addition, there will

For instance, ​in respect of its market study into online platforms and digital advertising
(8.21-8.48), the UK CMA proposed a package of remedies intended to decrease perceived
barriers to entry and expansion in the supply of general search services. The CMA’s
proposed package of remedies includes measures which vary in the impact they will have
on competition and the immediacy of that impact on the one hand, and in their degree of
intrusiveness and the attendant costs to relevant undertakings on the other.   

Recognising the need to strike the balance between these concerns, the CMA proposed
that the initial package of interventions in respect of general search should focus on a
number of less interventionist measures adopting an “​iterative approach to testing and
trailing​” remedies before considering more interventionist measures. The CMA noted that
successful implementation of less intrusive interventions may obviate the need for more
intrusive measures; or, conversely, may confirm that such measures are required.  

In striking this balance, the CMA expressly avoided creating a chilling effect on innovation.
The CMA observed that “​the impact of this intervention of dynamic incentives needs to be
given careful consideration​”. The CMA then discounted certain particularly intrusive
measures which ran “​excessive risks to innovation​”. One remedy it considered was
requiring Google to share ‘click and query’ data with search competitors. That remedy
could discourage innovation by encouraging third-parties to replicate the results that we
show, which would lead to lower quality services for users by reducing incentives for
search engines to innovate and improve algorithms. The CMA acknowledged ​further work
was required to “​consider how this intervention could be designed in a manner that
enhances incentives to innovate​”. 

A staged approach to remedy implementation is just one way the Commission can ensure
that the appropriate balance is struck between addressing potential concerns and
preserving existing market dynamics which do not contribute to these concerns. We
acknowledge it may not be appropriate in all circumstances, particularly where prompt
action may be needed. However, it does illustrate the value in a broad range of remedial
options, and the valuable flexibility in approach that would be lost if the legislation is cast
narrowly.  

29 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Question 35: Interim Measures 

As we set out in our response to the IIA, rather than adopting an ex ante regulatory
framework, it may be more appropriate to adapt existing antitrust tools and procedures to
allow assessments to be carried out more swiftly and effectively. We suggested that one
element of this may be fortifying antitrust investigations by the targeted use of interim
measures only for obvious and egregious abuses that cause serious and irreparable harm.
 34

To include the possibility to impose interim measures in the NCT, we encourage the
Commission to clearly identify a gap between interim measures in antitrust investigations
on the one hand and ex ante enforcement via the NCT on the other. Otherwise, the
overlapping regimes may lead to legal uncertainty. 

In designing an interim measures regime, we encourage the Commission to have regard to
the same overall
​i.e. flexibility,
effectiveness and proportionality. Particularly, for interim measures it will be important to
ensure that measures are withdrawn when no longer necessary, or where the burden of
having them in place outweighs their benefits. 

factors as we suggest for the remedies regime,

Question 36:Voluntary commitments 

Google supports enabling the Commission to accept voluntary remedies, as is the case in
its Article 101/102 investigations,
including at different stages of the process (analogous
to offering commitments to avoid a reference to Phase 2 in merger control, or the
‘undertakings in lieu’ in the UK market investigation regime). This would ensure flexibility
and proportionality in the regime.

 36

35

E. Institutional Set-Up of a New Competition Tool  

Questions 33-34 

Questions 33-34 address administrative matters, relating to the powers the Commission
should have to investigate and whether binding statutory deadlines should be in place. 

34 

35 

36 

We also suggested other fortifying measures, where needed: well-designed remedies;
intervention against
specific, harmful forms of self-preferencing (complemented by updated guidance); and use of a new tool along the
lines of the proposed NCT. A further example we provided was for organisational and procedural changes that
enable more efficient (and shorter) proceedings, and the setting up specialised teams with the expertise to assess
complex technical matters. 

Council Regulation 1/2003 of 16 December 2002 on the implementation of the rules on competition laid down in
[Articles 101 and 102 TFEU] [2003] OJ L1/1, Article 9. 

See also Jean Tirole “We must develop what I would call “participative antitrust,” in which the industry or other
parties propose possible regulations and the antitrust authorities issue some opinion, creating some legal certainty
without casting the rules in stone”. (quoted in an article in Quartz “​A Nobel-winning economist’s guide to taming
tech monopolies​” June 27, 2018. 

30 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Key messages: 

● Robust information gathering powers are essential for the NCT to serve its
purpose as a useful means of better understanding markets and flexibly
addressing market failures, and so that the Commission can obtain evidence
necessary to meet the requisite legal standard. 

● The Commission should match the information gathering powers it has to those

applicable under the existing EU antitrust and merger control regimes.  

● Binding deadlines can have value in providing certainty to undertakings and
fulfilling the Commission’s desire to act quickly, provided that they do not curtail
proper investigation.  

We note that Executive Vice President Vestager has commented that the NCT ​“would let
us investigate markets, in the same rigorous way that we already look into individual cases
– with the same exacting standards of proof, the right for the companies involved to
defend themselves, and the need for the decisions that we take to stand up in court.”  37

Question 33: Investigatory powers 

Given that the contemplated NCT could provide a useful way of better understanding
markets and addressing any market failures using flexible and creative remedies, robust
information gathering powers are essential.  

The legal test and the evidential standard the Commission proposes to adopt for the NCT
should arguably guide the information gathering powers it proposes to have when
investigating under that tool, so that it has the powers it needs to obtain the evidence
necessary to meet that standard.  

In principle these information gathering powers should match those that the Commission
has in the context of antitrust (including its existing powers in relation to sector enquiries) /
merger investigations. Further, adopting such powers into the NCT would enable to import
the experience, guidance and jurisprudence it has developed using such powers into its
use of the new tool. 

We note that responding to any regulatory investigation can be burdensome on all parties
involved. When exercising its powers we thus encourage the Commission to take into
account the burden that investigations have on undertakings, and especially on SMEs. 

37 

Competition in a Digital Age: Changing Enforcement for Changing Times​, ASCOLA Annual Conference, 26 June
2020. 

31 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Question 34: Binding deadlines  

In principle binding legal deadlines would be valuable, both to ensure certainty for
undertakings and in keeping with the Commission’s desire to act quickly. However,
deadlines should not be so short so as to curtail proper investigations. 

Questions 37-39 

Questions 37-39 ask questions relating to the extent to which affected undertakings
should be able to comment on (1) a potential finding of a structural competition problem
and (2) potential remedies. They also ask whether the NCT should be subject to
adequate safeguards including judicial review. 

Key messages: 

● The NCT should be consistent with the EU’s regulatory tradition, a cornerstone of
which is robust procedural safeguards and judicial review by the European
Courts. 

● The procedural safeguards, including access to file, applicable to investigations
under Article 101/102 may serve as an appropriate starting point, particularly if the
Commission wishes to use the NCT as a basis for imposing interventionist
remedies. 

● Clearly defined legal tests and evidentiary standards are also essential to

ensuring that the European Courts can exercise proper judicial oversight.  

The existing European Union competition laws contain robust procedural safeguards to
ensure the rights of defence of undertakings concerned and encourage high quality
decision making. This practice, supported by the robust judicial review of the European
Courts,
is an important part of ensuring the Commission’s status as a leading global
competition enforcer. In designing the NCT, the Commission should have regard to how it
can ensure consistency with that regulatory tradition.  

The nature of procedural safeguards necessary will depend on the scope of application of
the proposed NCT. Assuming that the Commission would have the power to impose
interventionist remedies at the end of its proceedings, the rights of entities subject to
those proceedings should be akin to those in Regulation 1/2003 for Article 101/102
investigations (which also brings with it related experience, guidance and jurisprudence).  

The right to be heard and access to file are essential, especially for undertakings to whom
remedies may apply. As with Article 101/102 investigations, this would therefore include the
right to comment on the Commission’s findings prior to the final decision, and to comment

32 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
on the appropriateness and proportionality of the envisaged remedies, to respect the right
to be heard.

 38

Another essential part of the European competition law regulatory tradition is proper
judicial oversight. For this to be effective,
it requires clearly defined legal tests and
evidential standards so that
the Commission’s decision making can be properly
scrutinised. Therefore it is important that these are detailed in the legislation. As we noted
in our response to the IIA, when it comes to the imposition of remedies, examples of
potential precedents include the ‘Adverse Effect on Competition’ test applicable in the UK
market investigation regime, or the ‘Significant Impediment to Effective Competition’ test
in the EU Merger Regulation. There is extensive jurisprudence in respect of each of these
tests which could inform the design of the applicable legal threshold for imposing
remedies under the NCT.  

In designing the regime, the Commission may wish to consider the role of the EU courts,
which is particularly important to ensure protection of rights where remedies are imposed,
but also whether the Commission would be required to issue an appealable decision
following complaints and/or at other preliminary stages. 

F. Conclusion 

Question 40 

Question 40 asks for views, in light of the separate consultation on the Digital Services
Act, on the suitability of the following to address market issues raised by online platform
ecosystems: current competition rules; a form of gatekeeper regulation; the NCT; and a
combination of options. 

We agree with the Commission’s view that there may be markets which may experience
anti-competitive outcomes that cannot be addressed effectively by the Commission’s
existing competition law enforcement. In principle there are therefore opportunities for
modernisation of the EU competition rules to enable the Commission to engage in
targeted correction of such outcomes. 

This modernisation need not necessarily be dramatic.
It could be achieved, for example,
through organisational and procedural changes that enable more efficient (and shorter)
antitrust proceedings, and by setting up specialised teams with the expertise to assess

39

38 

39 

As well as respecting this right, it may lead to better-designed remedies. See for example Alexiadis and de Streel’s
recently: “Given the novelty of many issues that may need to be remedied in the digital economy, combined with
the important information asymmetries which prevail between the relevant Authorities and the digital firms, it may
be critical in order to ensure the effectiveness of the public intervention to involve the regulated firms in the design
of regulatory remedies.” Alexiadis, P. and de Streel, Alexandre, Designing an EU Intervention Standard for Digital
Platforms,​ (February 26, 2020). Robert Schuman Centre for Advanced Studies Research Paper No. 2020/14. 

See Competition and the Industrial Challenge for the Digital Age, Jean Tirole, April 3, 2020: “​what is needed is not a
drastic change in antitrust law [...] the regulatory apparatus must be made more agile and in tune with evolving
economic thinking in the digital age​”.  

33 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
complex technical matters quickly. Where needed, antitrust investigations could be
fortified by (i) targeted use of interim measures;
(ii) well-designed remedies; (iii)
intervention against specific, harmful forms of anticompetitive conduct (complemented
by updated guidance); and (iv) use of a new tool along the lines of the proposed NCT
which,
in principle, fill an important
if appropriately calibrated and enforced could,
enforcement gap and ensure pro-competitive outcomes.  

Such a tool could provide a useful way of better understanding the relevant markets,
including through any framework for more advanced evidence-gathering and analysis, and
addressing any market failures using flexible and creative remedies.  

We have emphasised in this response the need for case-by-case evidence based decision
making. This is particularly important in dynamic markets where predicting outcomes with
reasonable certainty is challenging and where the same market features in seemingly
similar markets can produce highly different outcomes. This also has the effect of making
a set of clearly defined ex ante rules difficult to devise and apply in practice. 

We once again thank the Commission for the opportunity to submit a response to its
consultation on the NCT. We remain at the Commission’s disposal should you wish us to
elaborate on any of the points in this submission or on your proposals for the NCT more
generally. 

SECTION 2: Questionnaire 

C. Structural Competition Problems 

Structural competition problems concern structural market characteristics that have adverse
consequences on competition and may ultimately result in inefficient market outcomes in terms
of higher prices,
less choice and innovation. These market characteristics
(explained in more detail below) include extreme economies of scale and scope, strong network
effects, zero pricing and data dependency, as well as market dynamics favouring sudden and
radical decreases in competition ('tipping') and 'winner-takes- most' scenarios. These
characteristics can typically be found in digital but also in other markets. 

lower quality,

As the Commission has established in some of its competition decisions, these characteristics
can make a position of market power or dominance, once acquired, difficult to contest. 

While structural competition problems can arise in a broad range of different scenarios, they can
be generally grouped into two categories depending on whether harm is about to affect or has
already affected the market: 

● Structural risks for competition ​refer to scenarios where certain market characteristics
(e.g. network and scale effects,
lack of multi-homing and lock-in effects) and the
conduct of the companies operating in the markets concerned create a threat for
competition, arising through the creation of powerful market players with an entrenched
market position. This applies notably to tipping markets. The ensuing risks for
competition can arise through the creation of powerful market players with an

34 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
entrenched market and/or gatekeeper position, the emergence of which could be
prevented by early intervention. Other scenarios falling under this category include
unilateral strategies by non-dominant companies to monopolise a market through
anti-competitive means. 

● Structural lack of competition refers to a scenario where a market is not working well
and not delivering competitive outcomes due to its structure (i.e. structural market
failures). These include (i) markets displaying systemic failures going beyond the conduct
of a particular company due to certain structural features, such as high concentration
and entry barriers, customer lock-in, lack of access to data or data accumulation, and (ii)
oligopolistic market structures characterised by a risk for tacit collusion,
including
markets featuring increased transparency due to algorithm-based technological
solutions. 

The questions in this section aim to gather information on the types of market characteristics
that may result in structural competition problems, and on gaps in Articles 101 and 102 of the EU
Treaty, in order to understand the most appropriate scope for a new competition tool. (Article 101
of the EU Treaty prohibits agreements between companies which prevent, restrict or distort
competition in the EU and which may affect trade between Member States ('anti-competitive
agreements'). These include, for example, price-fixing or market-sharing cartels. Article 102 of
the Treaty prohibits any abuse by one or more undertakings of a dominant position within the
internal market or in a substantial part of it.)  

6. Please indicate to what extent each of the following market features /elements can be a
source or part of the reasons for a structural competition problem in a given market in your
view. 

Please, give examples of sectors/markets or scenarios you are aware of in the follow-up question. 

No 
knowledge 
/ No 
experience 

No 
importance 
/ No 
relevance 

Somewhat 
important 

Important 

Very 
important 

A - One or few large
players on the market
concentrated
(i.e.
market) 

B - High degree of
integration
vertical
integration'
('Vertical
relates
scenarios
same
the
where
company owns activities
and
upstream
at

to

x 

x 

35 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
downstream levels of
the supply chain) 

C - High start-up costs
(i.e. non-recurring costs
associated with setting
up a business) 

D - High fixed operating
costs (i. e. costs that do
not
an
change with
increase or decrease in
the amount of goods or
services produced or
sold) 

E - Regulatory barriers
('Regulatory
barriers'
refer to regulatory rules
that make 

-

Importance

of
F
patents or copyrights
that may prevent entry
or
market
more
expansion
cumbersome
or
extensively expensive) 

entry

-

on

Information
G
the
asymmetry
customer
side
('Information asymmetry'
occurs when customers
or
(consumers
an
businesses)
transaction
economic
possess
substantially
less knowledge than the
other party so that they
cannot make informed
decisions) 

in

x 

x 

x 

x 

x 

36 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
expenses

customer
H - High
costs
switching
are
('Switching costs'
one-time
a
consumer or business
incurs
the
or
it
inconvenience
experiences in order to
switch over from one
to another or
product
from
service
one
provider to another) 

I - Lack of access to a
given input/asset which
is necessary to compete
(e.g.
the market
on
access to data) 

scale

J - Extreme economies
of
and scope
('Extreme economies of
scale' occur when the
cost of producing a
product
service
or
decreases as the volume
of output (i.e. the scale
of
production)
increases. For instance
serving
additional
consumer on a platform
comes at practically zero
cost.
of
scope' occur when the
production of one good
or
the provision of a
service reduces the cost
of producing another
related good or service) 

'Economies

an

x 

x 

x 

37 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-

effects

K
direct
Strong
network effects (Where
are
network
present, the value of a
service
increases
according to the number
of others using it. For
instance in case of a
social network, a greater
users
number
increases the value of
the network for each
user. The more persons
are on a given social
the more
network,
join it. The
persons will
same applies e.g.
to
phone networks) 

of

-

Strong

effects,

L
indirect
network effects (Indirect
network
also
as
known
cross-side
typically occur
effects,
in case of platforms
which link at least two
user groups and where
the value of a good or
service for a user of one
group
increases
according to the number
of users of the other
group. For instance, the
more sellers offer goods
electronic
on
the more
marketplace,
customers
the
will
marketplace attract and
vice versa) 

an

M - Customers typically
use one platform (i.e.
they
predominantly
single-home) and cannot
easily switch 

x 

x 

x 

38 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
N - The platform owner
is competing with the
business users on the
platform (so-called dual
role
for
situations,
instance the owner of
e-commerce
the
platform that itself sells
on the platform) 

O - Significant financial
strength 

P - Zero-pricing markets
('Zero- price markets'
refer to markets in which
companies offer
their
goods/services such as
content,
software,
search functions, social
media platforms, mobile
applications,
travel
booking, navigation and
to
mapping
consumers at a zero
price and monetise via
typically
other means,
via
(i.e.
consumers
pay with
their time and attention) 

advertising

systems

Q - Data dependency
dependency'
('Data
scenarios
refers
where the operation of
companies are largely
based on big datasets) 

to

x 

x 

x 

x 

39 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
x 

R - Use of pricing
('Pricing
algorithms
are
algorithms'
that
automated tools
allow very
frequent
changes to prices and
other terms, taking into
account
all or most
competing offers on the
market.) 

6.1. Can you think of any other market features/elements that could be a source or part of
the reasons for a structural competition problem in a given market?  

Yes | ​No 

7. Please indicate what market scenarios may in your view qualify as structural competition
problems and rate them according to their importance. 

No 
knowledge 
/No 
experience 

No 
importance 
/No 
relevance 

Somewhat 
important 

Important 

Very 
important 

necessarily
A (not
dominant) company
with market power in
a
market
extends that market
power
related
to
markets. 

core

Anti-competitive 
monopolisation, 
where one market
rapidly
player may
acquire
market
shares due to its
capacity
put
a
competitors
disadvantage in the
market unfairly. 

to

at

x 

x 

40 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Highly concentrated
markets where only
one or few players
are present, which
allows to align their
market behaviour. 

The widespread use
of algorithmic pricing
that allows easily to
align prices. 

use
service

situations
customers

Gatekeeper 
scenarios:
where
typically 
predominantly
one
provider/platform 
and
(single-home)
therefore the market
dynamics
are only
determined by the
gatekeeper. 

Tipping (or
'winner
takes most') markets
('Tipping
markets'
refer e.g. to markets
where the number of
customers is a key
element for business
if a firm
success:
critical
reaches
a
of
threshold
customers,
it gets a
disproportionate 
in
advantage
capturing remaining
customers. 
Therefore,
certain 
characteristics of that
market, only one or
very few companies
will remain on those

due

to

x 

x 

x 

x 

41 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
markets in the long
term.) 

7.1. Please explain your answers above and give examples if possible. 

5000 character(s) maximum 

The various market features and types of conduct identified by the Commission in Qs 6 and 7
of the consultation, depending on the circumstances, can give rise to pro-competitive,
anti-competitive or competitively neutral results. Accordingly, these features and types of
lend themselves to ​per se rules: only evidence-driven case-by-case
conduct do not
assessments, including where appropriate detailed economic modelling, can help determine
whether such market features/types of conduct will lead to anti-competitive results.  

For example, in the period leading up to the introduction of the 2004 Merger Regulation, there
was debate as to the treatment of efficiencies in EU merger control, and in particular whether
they were harmful to competition (as they could give large players scale and efficiency
advantages that could not be matched, ultimately leading to a loss of competition) or
pro-competitive (with merger-specific efficiencies serving to offset the anti-competitive
effect of potentially problematic transactions). Today, it is one of the accepted principles of
competition law that efficiencies are generally pro-competitive, both in merger control and
under Article 101/102. However, this was not always the case. Robust economic analysis was
needed to inform the policy choice as to how to treat efficiencies, not the other way around. 

We expand on this response in response to questions 8-19 below and in the ​accompanying
paper​ uploaded in response to this consultation. 

7.2. Can you think of any other market scenarios that qualify as structural competition
problems? 

Yes | ​No 

8. Structural competition problems may arise in markets where a (not necessarily
dominant) company with market power in a core market may apply repeated strategies to
extend its market position to related markets, for instance, by relying on large amounts of
data. 

8.1. Do you have knowledge or did you come across such a market situation? 

Yes​ | No | Not applicable / no relevant experience or knowledge 

8.2. In which sectors/markets did you experience repeated strategies to extend market
power to related markets? 

42 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3000 character(s) maximum 

Concerns about companies with market power extending dominance into new markets should
not necessarily be limited to digital markets, as the Commission’s and Courts’ decisional
practice shows. The central
issues are whether (1) the expansion into the new market is
achieved through competition on the merits (e.g. an improved product design) or
to supply an
anticompetitive conduct
indispensable input), and (2) the conduct causes anticompetitive foreclosure in the related
market. 

(e.g. coercive tying, margin squeeze,

refusal

Companies in the digital sector generally seek to offer innovative products to attract users to
their services. Entry and/or expansion in a related market by a company with or without market
power (whether as a one off or on a repeated basis) often results in product improvements
that benefit consumers and customers. There is nothing inherently anti-competitive in offering
a portfolio of complementary products. This can have material benefits to customers (both end
consumers and other businesses who may utilise a portfolio of services from a third party to
more effectively serve their own customers). 

At the same time, we understand that, in some cases, these practices may also involve conduct
that does not constitute competition on the merits and which forecloses efficient rivals.  

We expand on this response in the ​accompanying paper ​uploaded in response to this
consultation.  

8.3. Please list and explain instances where a company with market power has used its
position to try to enter adjacent/neighbouring markets to expand its market power. 

3000 character(s) maximum 

Please see the response to Question 8.2. 

8.4. Do you consider that strategies to extend market power to related markets are
common in digital sectors/markets? 

Not applicable / no relevant experience or knowledge 

No 

Yes, to some extent 

Yes, common 

Yes, very common 

43 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8.5 Please explain your answer and identify the sectors/markets concerned. 

3000 character(s) maximum 

Please see the response to Question 8.2. 

8.6. In your experience, does a repeated strategy by a company with market power to
extend its market power to related markets raise competition concerns? 

Yes | ​No​ | Not applicable / no relevant experience or knowledge 

8.7. Please explain your answer, and indicate the competition concerns that may arise in
case of leveraging strategies. 

3000 character(s) maximum 

Self-preferencing can be pro- or anti-competitive, depending on the circumstances and the
nature of the self-preferencing at issue. There is a recognised risk that self-preferencing can
unfairly advantage companies’ own services at the expense of efficient rivals without offering
adequate countervailing benefits to customers. At the same time, certain practices that could
be described as ‘self-preferencing’ have led to clear product improvements, e.g. Google’s
practice of showing a map thumbnail at the top of search results and its display of weather
information at the top of search results for weather queries. This type of product integration
creates a richer search experience and offers more relevant information thereby saving people
time, improving discovery, and reducing search costs. 

Google believes that the continuing complexity and diversity of digital business models
reinforces the importance of a case-specific approach to avoid significant unintended
consequences. On the one hand, instances of self-preferencing deserve close scrutiny to
ensure that competition and consumers are not being harmed; on the other hand, a blanket
approach could deny users the benefits of innovation and product improvements without
evidence that a corresponding harm is being addressed. 

Presumptions of illegality for platform integrations would apply across a category of different
firms, competing in different areas, engaged in many different forms of conduct. This could
have several unintended consequences: hampering vertical integration, which is presumptively
efficient; eliminating synergies; and leading to delayed or mothballed product improvements.
Accordingly, to find practicable and constructive solutions to claims of unequal treatment, it’s
important to avoid abstract and one-size-fits-all rules.   

Instead, concerns of unequal treatment should be assessed based on the facts of a particular
case.
For example, the following questions may be relevant to the assessment of a new
product design: (i) Does the new design confer an undeserved advantage on the company? (ii)
Does the design improve quality and benefit consumers (and has the company conducted
testing to evidence the quality improvement)? (iii) Is the design a separate product, or part of
(iv) Does the design restrict consumers from
the main product offered to consumers?

44 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
reaching rivals, or does it allow consumers to reach or choose rival services? (v) What is the
competitive significance of the design? 

Accordingly, a case-by-case assessment is always required to assess allegations about
companies with market power entering new markets. Thus, the mere fact that a company may
repeatedly enter new markets is not, of itself, problematic.  

We expand on this response in the ​accompanying paper ​uploaded in response to this
consultation. 

9. Do you think that there is a need for the Commission to be able to intervene in situations
where structural competition problems may arise due to repeated strategies by companies
with market power to extend their market position into related markets? 

Yes​ | No | Not applicable / no relevant experience or knowledge 

9.1. Please explain your answer.
intervention that would be needed. 

If you replied yes, please also indicate the type of

3000 character(s) maximum  

intervene either

We acknowledge that currently the Commission cannot
(i) where
non-dominant companies are engaging in potentially anti-competitive leveraging, or (ii) ex ante
where there is a sufficiently high risk of a dominant company engaging in such conduct in the
future, as such cases fall outside the scope of Article 102 (and,
there is no
agreement/concerted practice, are not caught by Article 101 either). There is, however, a sound
principled basis for the scope of Articles 101 and 102. The quasi-criminal nature of any fines
imposed means that a ‘bad act’ must have been committed prior to intervention and in that
sense the tools are ex post only. Similarly, there is a reason that Article 102 only applies to
dominant undertakings - the likelihood of unilateral conduct resulting in anti-competitive
outcomes increases with the degree of market power of the relevant undertaking.   

if

Accordingly, in designing any new rules, the Commission should carefully consider how such
new rules could accommodate and facilitate the necessary case-specific analysis, and how
best to avoid anti-competitive outcomes without prohibiting or sanctioning conduct that may
be competitively neutral or even pro-competitive. The Commission should also ensure that the
NCT does not undermine the principles outlined above that have led to the drawing of the
boundaries of Articles 101/102. 

To the extent there are clear-cut examples of conduct where experience and/or empirical
evidence shows are inherently bad for competition, then it is conceivable that a case-by-case
analysis would not be required (whether under Articles 101/102 or an NCT) and such types of
conduct would lend themselves to being included in a list of per se prohibitions. Examples of
conduct where such treatment may be appropriate, as they do not appear to have any
pro-competitive rationale, may include product degradation (predatory innovation, such as in
Case IV/30.979 and 31.394​ Decca Navigator System​). 

45 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
We expand on this response in the ​accompanying paper ​uploaded in response to this
consultation. 

9.2. Do you consider that Articles 101 and 102 of the EU Treaty are suitable and sufficiently
effective to address those market situations? 

Yes | No | ​Not applicable / no relevant experience or knowledge 

10. Anti-competitive monopolisation refers to scenarios where one market player may
rapidly acquire market shares due to its capacity to put competitors at a disadvantage in
the market unfairly, for instance, by imposing unfair business practices or by limiting
access to key inputs, such as data. 

10.1. Do you have knowledge or did you come across such market situation?  

Yes​ | No | Not applicable / no relevant experience or knowledge 

In which sectors/markets did you experience anti-competitive monopolisation

10.2.
strategies? 

3000 character(s) maximum 

The Commission’s Q10 identifies a broad scope of conduct. The concerns identified may arise
in all sectors/markets.  

We expand on this response in the ​accompanying paper ​uploaded in response to this
consultation. 

10.3. Please provide examples and explain them. 

3000 character(s) maximum 

Please see the response to Question 10.2. 

10.4. Do you consider that anti-competitive monopolisation is common in digital
sectors/markets? 

Not applicable / no relevant experience or knowledge 

No 

Yes, to some extent 

Yes, common 

46 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Yes, very common 

10.5. Please explain your answer and identify the sectors/markets concerned. 

3000 character(s) maximum 

Please see the response to Question 10.2. 

In your experience, does anti-competitive monopolisation raise competition

10.6.
concerns? 

Yes | ​No​ | Not applicable / no relevant experience or knowledge 

10.7. Please explain your answer and indicate the competition concerns that may arise in
case of anticompetitive monopolisation. 

3000 character(s) maximum 

Though we would agree that, in principle, market situations can arise where one market player
is able to put competitors at an unfair disadvantage, we would urge a rigorous approach
involving a careful, case-by-case assessment of specific instances, rather than blanket
categorisation of a broad range of practices. 

In its Q10 the Commission identifies two alleged practices that it appears to consider would be
‘anti-competitive monopolisation’. These are each very different and need to be considered
separately.  

The two practices identified by the Commission are each very different and need to be
considered separately.  

‘Unfair business practices’:  

‘Unfair business practices’ is a potentially very broad category of behaviour. For the sake of
providing legal certainty and protecting innovation, we would stress the importance of robust
and consistent definitions of ‘fairness’ and evidence-based assessments of the competitive
effects of specific practices. In particular, we would caution against defining ‘unfairness’ in a
way that discourages innovation aimed at improving user experience, which can lead to a
stronger market position. Our success in Search, for example, stems from investments in
innovative new search engine features that users value. The CMA for example has surveyed
both consumers and industry participants, acknowledging that “Google’s search results are
generally perceived to be higher quality than those of Bing”.   

‘Limiting access to key inputs, such as data’: 

There is a strong case for data use and sharing goals to be effectively and proportionately
pursued through existing means and collaborative efforts. Google has adopted an approach

47 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
that is open but respectful of users’ rights by making large-scale search datasets publicly
available for free (e.g., through the Google Trends and Natural Questions tools, along with
multiple other free and open source datasets). Though we are committed to open systems, we
believe that discussions on ‘limiting’ versus sharing data access need to take account of the
risks of any blanket data-sharing requirement to privacy and incentives to invest. 

As we noted in our response to the IIA, we also consider that competition between digital
platforms, including through innovation, can be enhanced by measures that let users switch
and multi-home without losing access to their data (i.e. portability). In principle, interoperability
and data portability may be the solution to the Commission’s concerns relating to access to
key inputs, subject to the limitations / concerns outlined herein, in our response to the DSA
consultation and in our IIA response (e.g. the need to preserve innovation and product quality,
and to protect user privacy).  

We expand on this response in the ​accompanying paper ​uploaded in response to this
consultation.  

11. Do you think that there is a need for the Commission to be able to intervene in situations
where structural competition problems may arise due to anti-competitive monopolisation? 

Yes​ | No | Not applicable / no relevant experience or knowledge 

11.1. Please explain your answer.
intervention that would be needed.  

3000 character(s) maximum  

If you replied yes, please also indicate the type of

As mentioned in our response to Question 10, ‘unfair business practices’ and ‘limiting access to
key inputs, such as data’ are each very different and need to be considered separately.  

‘Unfair business practices’: In investigating instances of potentially unfair business practices,
the Commission should also be cognisant of whether the NCT will be the most appropriate
tool. For example, both Article 102, as Article 102(a) identifies as an abuse “directly or indirectly
imposing … unfair trading conditions”, and the existing P2B Regulation, which is targeted at
addressing unfair business practices, provide alternative mechanisms for intervention. 

‘Limiting access to key inputs, such as data’: Article 102 provides an existing mechanism for
companies to seek access to key inputs such as data they need to be able to compete under
the refusal to supply doctrine. We note that to date, this doctrine has been interpreted
narrowly, partly over concerns that sharing obligations reduce competition and diminish
incentives of both the company subject to the obligation and the ones benefiting from it.  

As is apparent from our responses to Q10 above, these are not clear cut issues and they
require careful case-by-case analysis to determine whether or not there is a potential concern
and, if so, how best to address such concern. The NCT could be a tool to facilitate and foster
such assessment 

48 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
We expand on this response in the ​accompanying paper ​uploaded in response to this
consultation.  

11.2. Do you consider that Articles 101 and 102 of the EU Treaty are suitable and sufficiently
effective to address anti-competitive monopolisation? 

Yes | No | ​Not applicable / no relevant experience or knowledge 

12. An oligopoly is a highly concentrated market structure, where a few sizeable firms
operate. Oligopolists may be able to behave in a parallel manner and derive benefits from
their collective market power without necessarily entering into an agreement or concerted
practice of the kind generally prohibited by competition law. In those situations rivals
often 'move together' to e.g. raise prices or limit production at the same time and to the
same extent, without having an explicit agreement. Such so-called coordinated behaviour
can have the same outcome as a cartel for customers, e.g. price increases are aligned. 

12.1. Do you have knowledge or did you come across such market situations? 

Yes​ | No | Not applicable / no relevant experience or knowledge 

12.2. Please identify the markets concerned and explain those market situations. 

3000 character(s) maximum  

In some cases, oligopolists may be able to behave in a parallel manner and derive benefits from
their collective market power without necessarily entering into an anti-competitive agreement
or concerted practice. This concern may arise in any market / sector.  

We expand on this response in the ​accompanying paper ​uploaded in response to this
consultation.  

12.3. In your experience, what are the main features of an oligopolistic market with a
high/substantial risk of tacit collusion? 

No 
knowledge 
/No 
experience 

No 
importance 
/No 
relevance 

Somewhat 
important 

Important 

Very 
important 

concentration

High
levels 

x 

49 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Competitors
can
monitor each other's
behaviour 

Oligopolists 
against
competing
each other in several
markets 

Homogeneity
products 

of

access

High barriers to enter
(e.g.,
to
intellectual
property
rights, high marketing
costs,
global
distribution footprint,
strong
incumbency
advantages, network
effects...) 

Strong
advantages
customers'
costs and/or inertia 

incumbency
due
to
switching

Lack of transparency
for customers on best
offers available in the
markets 

integration
Vertical
into key assets of the
vertical supply chain 

Existence of a clear
price leader, resulting
in
follower
behaviour 

leader-

x 

x 

x 

x 

x 

x 

x 

x 

Please explain your answer and your rating above. 

50 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3000 character(s) maximum 

In Q12.3 the Commission lists a number of features that may in certain circumstances
contribute to the creation of oligopolistic markets. The analysis of whether this leads to a
substantial risk of tacit collusion will be fact-specific and requires a case-by-case analysis.
Additionally, the analysis must go beyond these factors. It is important to note that certain
markets may be most economically efficient with a small number of players, and this does not
automatically mean that there is a competition problem.  

The analysis of such markets must therefore progress beyond assessing whether an oligopoly
has formed or whether there are factors which may make an oligopoly likely in the foreseeable
future. This further analysis should focus on the likely outcome of that actual or putative
oligopoly on competition. The relevant factors here are well known in competition analysis, e.g.
is pricing competitive or is it maintained at supra-competitive levels, do companies continue to
innovate and introduce new products and features, can competition be observed in practice
e.g. through regular switching.  

Whilst not unique to digital platforms, these concerns can arise on both sides of a platform as
well as inter-platform. Coordination to game the outcome of platforms’ offerings can
adversely impact consumers. A recent AdC investigation in Portugal has found that two
telecommunications services agreed to limit competition in advertising on the Google search
engine. We note that a key question in considering whether to intervene in respect of such
conduct will be whether it generates efficiencies that deliver benefits to consumers.  

We expand on this response in the ​accompanying paper ​uploaded in response to this
consultation. 

12.4. Can you think of any other features of an oligopolistic market with a high /substantial
risk of tacit collusion? 

Yes |​ ​No  

13. Do you consider that there is a need for the Commission to be able to intervene in
oligopolistic markets prone to tacit collusion in order to preserve /improve competition? 

Yes​ | No | Not applicable / no relevant experience or knowledge 

13.1. Please explain your answer. 

3000 character(s) maximum   

We acknowledge the need for the Commission to be able to intervene in oligopolistic markets
prone to tacit collusion in order to preserve/improve competition. However, Articles 101
(through the concerted practices doctrine) and 102 (through collective dominance) can already
be used to address certain concerns of this nature. The Commission should use these tools
(including updating/issuing guidance) where possible as a first step, and consider carefully how
to identify instances where investigating/intervening with the NCT would be an appropriate

51 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
means of conducting the necessary case-by-case analysis. That analysis must both identify
the presence or risk of an oligopoly, and determine the nature of the competitive effects
produced by that market structure (which could be pro or anti-competitive, or competition
neutral). Only once these two questions have been answered can the Commission determine
whether intervention (under any tool) would be appropriate. 

We expand on this response in the ​accompanying paper ​uploaded in response to this
consultation. 

13.2. Do you consider that Articles 101 and 102 of the EU Treaty are suitable and sufficiently
effective instruments to address oligopolistic market situations prone to tacit collusion? 

Yes | No | ​Not applicable / no relevant experience or knowledge 

14. Relying on digital tools, companies may easily ​align their behaviour, in particular retail
prices via pricing algorithms​. (Pricing algorithms are automated tools that allow very
frequent changes to prices and other terms taking into account all or most competing
offers on the market.) 

14.1. Do you have knowledge or did you come across such market situations? 

Yes​ | No | Not applicable / no relevant experience or knowledge 

14.2. Please list and explain those situations and in which markets you encountered them. 

3000 character(s) maximum 

Pricing algorithms may be used in a wide variety of sectors. We note also that the distinction
between whether the goods/services are digital or not does not seem relevant to the use of
pricing algorithms. 

We expand on this response in the ​accompanying paper ​uploaded in response to this
consultation. 

14.3. In your view, what are the main features of markets where pricing algorithms are
used? 

No 
knowledge 
/No 
experience 

No 
importance 
/No 
relevance 

Somewhat 
important 

Important 

Very 
important 

52 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The market is highly
transparent
(i.e.
competitors can easily
and
observe
understand
the
market behaviour of
and
players,
other
align their conduct),
even without using the
pricing algorithms 

is not
e.
(i.
the pricing

The market
transparent
without
algorithms, 
competitors would not
be able to observe and
understand
market
behaviour
of other
players) 

Prices
aligned,
market
explicitly
their prices 

might

be
without
players
agreeing

and
goods
The
services offered in the
market where
the
pricing algorithms are
used are digital 

The
and
goods
services offered in the
market where
the
pricing algorithms are
used are not digital 

x 

x 

x 

x 

x 

14.5. Do you consider that pricing algorithms are common in digital sectors /markets? 

Not applicable/no relevant experience or knowledge 

No 

53 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Yes, to some extent 

Yes, common 

Yes, very common 

14.6. Please explain your answer and identify the sectors/markets concerned. 

3000 character(s) maximum  

Please see the response to Question 14.2 

14.7. In your experience, what are the main competition concerns that arise in markets
where pricing algorithms are used?  

Alignment of prices/less competition between market players 

Prices increase 

Less choice for customers 

Others 

15. Do you consider that there is a need for the Commission to be able to intervene in
markets where pricing algorithms are prevalent in order to preserve/improve competition? 

Yes​ | No | Not applicable / no relevant experience or knowledge 

15.1. Please explain your answer. 

3000 character(s) maximum  

We note that the report for the Commission “Competition Policy for the digital era” referred to
the “​intense academic discussion around the potential for pricing algorithms to enable
alignment of prices​.” The Furman review identified two main concerns, first ​“That pricing
algorithms might help make explicitly collusive agreements more stable, for example by making
it easier for businesses to automatically monitor the prices their competitors are offering and
detect when they deviate from the collusive agreement.” Second, ​“That pricing algorithms
could also lead to new forms of tacit collusion – where there is no explicit agreement between
businesses to collude, but where pricing algorithms effectively deliver the same result. At the
extreme, pricing algorithms drawing on machine learning technology could autonomously learn
to collude. 

As the Commission has noted, to a large extent, pricing algorithms can be analysed by
reference to the traditional reasoning and categories used in EU competition law. Competition
authorities have already dealt with cases on the first concern.In a recent joint report the French

54 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and German competition authorities concluded that ​“the existing tools seem, at this stage,
flexible in their application to cases involving algorithmic behaviour.” 

However, Article 101 would not apply if pricing algorithms produce price coordination absent
an agreement / concerted practice to that effect. To the extent that the Commission could use
a new tool to investigate such concerns, as we noted above in the context of oligopolistic
markets / tacit coordination, it would need to undertake a case-by-case analysis to determine
whether this creates a problem by in fact reducing price competition and thereby causing
consumer harm. This is exemplified, for example, by the Webtaxi case, where competition
concerns arising from use of a pricing algorithm between competitors were offset by
enhanced efficiency. 

We expand on this response in the ​accompanying paper ​uploaded in response to this
consultation. 

15.2. Do you consider that Articles 101 and 102 of the EU Treaty are suitable and sufficiently
effective instruments to address all scenarios where algorithmic pricing can raise
competition issues? 

Yes | No | ​Not applicable / no relevant experience or knowledge 

16. So-called tipping (or 'winner takes most') markets are markets where the number of
users is a key element for business success: if a firm reaches a critical threshold of
customers,
it gets a disproportionate advantage in capturing remaining customers.
Therefore, due to certain characteristics of that market, only one or very few companies
will remain on those markets in the long term. 

16.1. Do you have knowledge or did you come across such market situations? 

Yes​ | No | Not applicable / no relevant experience or knowledge 

16.2. Please list and explain those situations and in which markets you encountered them. 

3000 character(s) maximum  

Certain markets, in a variety of economic sectors and under certain circumstances, may be
susceptible to consolidation in the hands of one large player. However, as the authors of the
UK report “Unlocking Digital Competition” identified, “Digital markets vary greatly so no general
rules apply to all of them. But in many cases tipping can occur once a certain scale is reached,
driven by a combination of economies of scale and scope; network externalities whether on
the side of the consumer or seller; integration of products, services and hardware; behavioural
limitations on the part of consumers for whom defaults and prominence are very important;
difficulty in raising capital; and the importance of brands.”   

A case-by-case analysis is thus required. 

55 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
We expand on this response in the ​accompanying paper ​uploaded in response to this
consultation. 

16.3. Please indicate what are in your view, the main market features of a tipping market.
Please rate each of the listed competition concerns according to its importance. 

No 
knowledge 
/No 
experience 

No 
importance 
/No 
relevance 

Somewhat 
important 

Important 

Very 
important 

Direct
effects 

Indirect
effects 

network

network

Economies of scale 

Users 
predominantly 
single-home
(i.e.
they use typically
one platform only) 

x 

x 

x 

x 

16.4. Please explain your answer, indicating why you consider the above features relevant
for a tipping market and describe any other feature that you consider important. 

3000 character(s) maximum 

We indicate that each of the above features / elements are somewhat important when seeking
to identify a tipping market as in each case an evidence-based individualised assessment is
required.  

A case-by-case analysis will thus be required to identify markets which are prone to tipping,
which market features may lead to tipping, and to determine whether, if so, they would in fact
tip and whether subsequent events such as technological developments or market entry would
reverse the impact. A strong market position does not preclude the potential for new
competitors to arise, as the threat of such competition “​keeps incumbents on their toes​” and
leads them to “​innovate to avoid being replaced​”. 

56 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
As identified in various reports such as those referenced above, tipping may occur due to the
factors listed by the Commission (network effects, economies of scale and single-homing),
and these factors may be present in some digital markets, the digital sector is highly
competitive with a vast number of companies and therefore tipping cannot be said to be an
inherent characteristic of  digital sectors/markets. 

In the digital economy, new technologies develop and marketplaces change quickly.  For
example, small companies can rapidly achieve a prominent position displacing incumbents
(e.g., despite only being released globally in 2018, TikTok is now one of the most downloaded
apps of the last decade and ranked in sixth place in the global mobile app rankings by monthly
active users for 2019). 

We expand on this response in the ​accompanying paper ​uploaded in response to this
consultation. 

16.5. In your view, is tipping common in digital sectors/markets? 

Not applicable/ no relevant experience or knowledge 

No 

Yes, to some extent 

Yes, common 

Yes, very common 

16.6. Please explain your answer and identify the sectors/markets concerned. 

3000 character(s) maximum  

Please see our responses to Questions 16.2 and 16.4. 

16.7. In your experience, what are the main competition concerns that arise in tipping
markets? Please rate each of the listed competition concerns according to its importance. 

No 
knowledge 
/No 
experience 

No 
importance 
/No 
relevance 

Somewhat 
important 

Important 

Very 
important 

57 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Efficient
or
innovative market
will
players
disappear 

There will not be
sufficient 
competition on the
market
in the long
run 

Customers will not
have enough choice 

Customers may face
insufficient 
innovation 

Customers may face
higher prices 

x 

x 

x 

x 

x 

16.8. Please explain your answers above. Please also use this space to mention any other
competition concerns that arise in tipping markets and rate their importance. 

3000 character(s) maximum 

We indicate that each of the above features / elements are somewhat important when seeking
to identify competition concerns in a tipping market as in each case an evidence-based
individualised assessment is required.  

Please see further our responses to Questions 16.2 and 16.4. 

17. Do you consider that there is a need for the Commission to be able to intervene early in
tipping markets to preserve/improve competition? 

Yes​ ​| No | Not applicable / no relevant experience or knowledge  

17.1. Please explain your answer. 

3000 character(s) maximum  

As we note above, a case-by-case analysis is required to identify markets which are prone to
tipping, which market features may lead to tipping, and to determine whether, if so, they would

58 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
in fact tip and whether subsequent events such as technological developments or market entry
would revere the impact. 

The competition concerns relating to tipping may not be addressed fully by Article 101 (there is
no agreement / concerted practice) and Article 102 (the firm(s) may not yet be dominant, and
the concerns may not necessarily be an abuse). Thus there may be a case for the Commission
to intervene in some markets that it identifies are at risk of tipping in cases where it may not be
able to do so currently.  

We expand on this response in the ​accompanying paper ​uploaded in response to this
consultation. 

17.2. Do you consider that Articles 101/102 of the EU Treaty are suitable and sufficiently
effective instruments to intervene early in 'tipping markets', to preserve/improve
competition? 

Yes | No | ​Not applicable / no relevant experience or knowledge 

18. So-called 'gatekeepers' control access to a number of customers (and/or to a given
input /service such as data) that - at least in the medium term - cannot be reached
otherwise. Typically, customers of gatekeepers cannot switch easily ('single-homing'). A
gatekeeper may not necessarily be 'dominant' within the meaning of Article 102 of the EU
Treaty. 

18.1. Have you encountered or are you aware of markets characterised by 'gatekeepers'? 

Yes​ ​| No | Not applicable / no relevant experience or knowledge 

18.2. Please list which companies you consider to be 'gatekeepers' and in which markets. 

3000 character(s) maximum 

The Commission appears to consider gatekeepers as large online platforms driven by strong
economies of scale and direct and indirect network effects who increasingly act as private
gatekeepers to critical online activities for an exceptionally large population of private and
business users. As explained further in our response to the consultation on the proposed
Gatekeeper Regulation, identifying which firms qualify as gatekeepers is a complex exercise
that requires further analysis.  

The advantage of the NCT, as the Commission appears to envisage it, is that it would be
flexible enough to investigate competition concerns in a market without needing to label a
subset of platforms as ‘gatekeepers’. As we noted in our response to the IIA, if the threshold in,
for example an ex ante regulation, is that a platform is a ‘gatekeeper’, then the Commission
would need to consider carefully how to define ‘gatekeeper’ platforms in a clear and certain
way that is sufficiently future-proof. 

59 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
We expand on this response in the ​accompanying paper ​uploaded in response to this
consultation. 

18.3. Do you consider that gatekeeper scenarios are common in digital sectors/markets 

Not applicable/no relevant experience or knowledge 

No 

Yes, to some extent 

Yes, common 

Yes, very common 

18.4. Please explain your answer and identify the sectors/markets concerned. 

3000 character(s) maximum 

The Commission’s concern in the digital sector appears to relate to “​some large online
platforms benefitting from significant network effects and acting as gatekeepers​”.
Nevertheless, the relevance of network effects, other factors, and countervailing factors
(multi-homing etc.), varies between markets, and therefore it would be difficult to characterise
gatekeeper scenarios as “common” in digital sectors/markets. The Commission should also be
cautious in condemning network effects, which can create virtuous cycles and encourage
in certain
pro-competitive behaviour by the platform on both sides of the market
circumstances. A case-by-case assessment is needed to identify a gatekeeper, its ability and
incentives negatively to affect competition, and pro-competitive benefits. App platforms, for
example, though characterised by some as ‘gatekeepers’, have been widely recognised as
driving innovation and growth in the app economy.  

40

The Commission’s approach to gatekeepers appears to date to be focused on “online
platforms” and thus to that extent the gatekeeper scenarios posited by the Commission occur
in digital markets. However we note that one side of a digital platform may be retail, with digital
being only one channel in a wider market(s). Also, there may be gatekeepers in markets such as
electronic communications, and more traditional essential facilities (e.g. ports). Thus
depending on the definition adopted, gatekeepers may not be limited to the digital sector. 

We expand on this response in the ​accompanying paper ​uploaded in response to this
consultation. 

40 

See, e.g.: ​http://faculty.haas.berkeley.edu/HERMALIN/armstrong.pdf​.  

60 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
18.5. Do you consider that gatekeeper scenarios also occur in non-digital sectors/markets? 

Not applicable / no relevant experience or knowledge | No |​ ​Yes  

18.6. Please explain your answer and identify the sectors/markets concerned. 

3000 character(s) maximum  

Please see our response to questions 18.2 and 18.4 above. 

18.7. Please indicate what are, in your view, the features that qualify a company as a
'gatekeeper'. Please rate each of the listed features according to its importance.(0 = no
knowledge/no experience; 1 = no importance/no relevance; 2 = somewhat important; 3 =
important; 4 = very important). 

No 
knowledge 
/No 
experience 

No 
importance 
/No 
relevance 

Somewhat 
important 

Important 

Very 
important 

x 

x 

x 

number

High
customers/users 

of

Customers cannot
easily switch (lack
of multi-homing) 

Business operators
need to accept the
of
conditions
competition of the
platform - including
business
its
to
environment
-
reach
the
customers that use
specific
the
platform 

18.8. Please explain your answer, indicating why you consider the indicated features
relevant for qualifying a company as a gatekeeper. Please also add any other relevant
features that qualify a company as a gatekeeper and rate their importance. 

61 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3000 character(s) maximum 

Each of the factors posited by the Commission in Q18.7 may be relevant to varying degrees in a
particular industry, and this may change over time. As such a case-by-case analysis is required
to identify which companies may qualify as a gatekeeper in a particular market. 

We expand on this response in the ​accompanying paper ​uploaded in response to this
consultation. 

18.9. In your experience, what are the main competition concerns that arise in markets
featuring a gatekeeper? Please rate each of the listed competition concerns according to
its relevance. 

No 
knowledge 
/No 
experience 

No 
importance 
/No 
relevance 

Somewhat 
important 

Important 

Very 
important 

x 

x 

x 

the
of
on

Gatekeepers 
determine
dynamics
competition
the 
aftermarket/platf
orm 

As 
customers/users 
easily
cannot
switch, they have
to
the
accept
competitive 
environment
the
/platform 

on
aftermarket

reach

Business 
can
operators
the
only
that
customers
use the specific
platform/aftermar
ket by adapting
business
their
and
model

62 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
accepting
terms
conditions 

their
and

18.10. Please explain your answers above. Please also use this space to mention any other
competition concerns that arise in markets featuring a gatekeeper and rate them in
importance. 

3000 character(s) maximum 

Each of the factors posited by the Commission in Q18.9 may be relevant to varying degrees in
a particular industry, and this may change over time. In a recent Deloitte ​report​, one EU
developer described app platforms as offering “great opportunities, a fantastic medium” for
developers. As such a case-by-case analysis is required to identify whether an undertaking’s
role as a gatekeeper gives rise to any potential competition problems.  

Further, we note that the mere presence of a ‘gatekeeper’ does not necessarily give rise to
competition concerns and may generate pro-competitive effects, which would need to be
taken into account in any analysis of the effect on competition. For example, whilst some may
label Google, Apple, Facebook, and/or Amazon as gatekeeper platforms, as we noted in our
response to the IIA these four companies are reported to be some of the largest investors in
R&D, as reflected in the 2018 Global Innovation 1000 study. Google has consistently spent over
15% of its revenues on R&D since 2016. By contrast, the ​average ‘R&D ratio’ in the EU is 3.4%​. 

We expand on this response in the ​accompanying paper ​uploaded in response to this
consultation. 

19. Do you consider that there is a need for the Commission to be able to intervene in
gatekeeper scenarios to prevent/address structural competition problems? 

Yes​ ​| No | Not applicable / no relevant experience or knowledge 

19.1. Please explain your answer. 

3000 character(s) maximum  

To the extent that the Commission identifies competition concerns relating to gatekeepers,
then we acknowledge that there may be an enforcement gap with respect to existing
competition law tools. Notably,
in the context of Article 101 there may not be a relevant
agreement / concerted practice; and in the context of Article 102 either the gatekeeper may
not be dominant, or the behaviour at issue may not be an abuse. Thus there may be a case for
the Commission to intervene where it identifies competition concerns arising from a firm being
a ‘gatekeeper’.  

63 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
In this regard, the contemplated NCT could provide a useful way of better understanding the
relevant markets, including through any framework for more advanced evidence-gathering
and analysis, and addressing any market failures using flexible and creative remedies. The
flexibility of the contemplated NCT may be particularly useful in the context of gatekeepers
given that a case-by-case analysis is required to identify any competition concern, and balance
these concerns against any pro-competitive benefits from the platform under consideration.  

As we identified in our response to the IIA and expanded upon in our response to the Digital
Services Act consultation in respect of the proposed gatekeeper regulation, the solution to the
‘gatekeeper’ concerns may comprise a package of complementary reforms. New regulations
could address issues that fall outside the scope of competition law, but which are important for
digital markets to function in a fair, efficient manner (e.g., ensuring data portability, appropriate
levels of transparency, and fairness in contractual relations). It appears to us at this initial stage
that some of these measures could be important whatever the size or market position of the
digital platform at issue. Similarly, as one looks back at the unpredictable nature of historic
innovation and tries to imagine what kinds of digital products and services European
consumers will be using in the future,
it seems reasonable to assume that notions of
‘gatekeeper’, ‘platform’, and even ‘digital’ will need to be robust and flexible. The NCT could
have a valuable role in any such package of reforms, enabling evidence based case-by-case
assessment where the object of the Commission’s concerns falls outside the scope of existing
(or future) ex ante regulation. 

We expand on this response in the ​accompanying paper ​uploaded in response to this
consultation. 

20. In ​which sectors/markets do you consider that structural competition problems may
occur? 

Structural competition problems may occur in all sectors/markets 

Structural competition problems may occur in some specific sectors/markets (including but
not only digital sectors/markets). 

Structural competition problems only occur in digital sectors/markets 

Structural competition problems mainly occur in digital sectors/markets 

Not applicable / no relevant experience or knowledge 

20.1. Please explain your answer and identify the sectors/markets your reply refers to. 

3000 character(s) maximum  

64 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Many of the factors relating to structural competition problems identified by the Commission
in its IIA related to digital markets. However, it is not necessarily the case that structural risks
for competition and structural lack of competition are limited to digital markets.  

Under the UK’s market investigation tool, which we understand to be an inspiration for the NCT,
“​As well as being able to look into the conduct of firms, the [CMA] can probe for other causes
of possible [Adverse Effects on Competition], such as structural aspects of the market
(including barriers to entry and expansion) or the conduct of customers.​” In its guidance on the
tool, the CMA identifies a variety of structural features it has identified, in a variety of markets.
The CMA has, by way of illustration, intervened in respect of the supply of energy, retail
banking services, airports and aggregates, amongst others.  

It is also a general principle of EU competition law that it applies universally, without regard to
the nationality of the company, its owners, or sector. As such, should the Commission propose
a narrow NCT, for example limited to digital markets, it should enunciate clearly the basis on
the reasons for excluding certain sectors, and consider carefully whether this undermines the
universal application of competition law. 

We note in this regard comments by Executive Vice President Vestager in a recent speech:
“​Many of the biggest issues that this tool could help us resolve are linked to digital markets. But
I doubt that it would make sense to apply it only to these markets – instead of covering the
whole economy, as our existing competition powers do. That’s partly because the sort of issues
I’ve discussed come up in many other markets as well. In fact, the Greek, Icelandic and British
competition authorities have so far only used this type of power in markets that aren’t digital.
It’s also because the digital transition is affecting pretty much every industry there is. So it’s
hard to draw the line between what’s digital and what isn’t – especially when you consider that
the rules we come up with now should be ready for the future, when that line may get even
more blurred​.” EVP Vestager has also commented that “​Neutrality is a guiding principle of
everything we do. When we take our decisions, we have to follow where the evidence and law
lead us, and treat every business the same. However big or small they are, and wherever they
come from​”.  

We expand on this response in the ​accompanying paper ​uploaded in response to this
consultation. 

21. If in response to question 7 you indicated that other forms of structural competition
problems in addition to the ones listed above exist, do you consider that there is a need for
the Commission to be able to intervene in order to address these other forms of structural
competition problems in order to preserve/improve competition? 

Yes | No | ​Not applicable / no relevant experience or knowledge 

22. Article 101 of the EU Treaty prohibits agreements between companies which prevent,
restrict or distort competition in the EU and which may affect trade between Member
for example, price-fixing or
States (anti-competitive agreements). These include,

65 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
market-sharing cartels.
sufficiently effective instrument to address structural competition problems? 

Is Article 101 of the EU Treaty, in your view, a suitable and

Yes​ ​| No | Not applicable / no relevant experience or knowledge 

22.1. Please explain your answer. If you replied 'no', please indicate the types of conduct
and situations that in your view, Article 101 of the EU Treaty does not sufficiently or
effectively address, and why. 

3000 character(s) maximum  

A case-by-case assessment is required to determine whether particular structural competition
problems can be addressed using Article 101.  

We agree that on the basis of the concerns identified by the Commission there may be
opportunities to modernise the EU competition law framework. However in some instances
where existing competition law may be the appropriate tool. The Commission’s assessment of
which tool to use to address a particular problem in a particular sector would require an
evidence based, case-by-case assessment, and therefore the legislator should be cautious of
legislating in advance to limit a particular
to markets/ sectors with particular
characteristics. 

tool

22.2. Please explain in which markets the market situations and problematic conducts you
have identified manifest themselves. 

3000 character(s) maximum  

Please see our response to Question 22.1. 

23. Article 102 of the Treaty prohibits any abuse by one or more undertakings of a
dominant position within the internal market or in a substantial part of it. Is Article 102 of
the Treaty,
in your view, suitable and sufficiently effective to address structural
competition problems? 

Yes​ ​| No | Not applicable / no relevant experience or knowledge 

23.1. Please explain your answer. If you replied 'no', please indicate the type of conduct and
situations that in your view, Article 102 of the EU Treaty does not sufficiently or effectively
address, and why. 

3000 character(s) maximum  

A case-by-case assessment is required to determine whether particular structural competition
problems can be addressed using Article 102. 

66 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
We agree that on the basis of the concerns identified by the Commission there may be
opportunities to modernise the EU competition law framework. However in some instances
where existing competition law may be the appropriate tool. The Commission’s assessment of
which tool to use to address a particular problem in a particular sector would require an
evidence based, case-by-case assessment, and therefore the legislator should be cautious of
legislating in advance to limit a particular
to markets/ sectors with particular
characteristics. 

tool

23.2. Please explain in which markets the market situations and problematic conducts you
have identified manifest themselves. 

3000 character(s) maximum  

Please see the response to Question 23.1. 

D. Assessment of Policy Options 

The questions in this section seek to gather feedback on the policy options outlined in the
Inception Impact Assessment​.  

24. In light of your responses to the questions of Section C, do you think that there is a
need for a new competition tool to deal with structural competition problems that Articles
101 and 102 of the EU Treaty (on which current competition law enforcement is based)
cannot tackle conceptually or cannot address in the most effective manner? (Article 101 of
the EU Treaty prohibits agreements between companies which prevent, restrict or distort
competition in the EU and which may affect
trade between Member States
(anti-competitive agreements). These include, for example, price-fixing or market-sharing
cartels. Article 102 of the Treaty prohibits any abuse by one or more undertakings of a
dominant position within the internal market or in a substantial part of it.) 

Yes​ | No | Not applicable / no relevant experience or knowledge 

24.1. Please explain your answer. Please indicate which structural competition problems
the new tool should tackle or address. 

3000 character(s) maximum  

Several of the proposals that are now under consideration by the Commission have the
potential to promote competition and innovation in the EEA. For example, we have long
supported enhanced data portability, which facilitates switching, multi-homing, and provides
opportunities for new players to enter or expand in digital markets. Providing better access to
aggregated datasets could benefit research and development in a range of industries while
also safeguarding user data privacy.  

67 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The contemplated NCT could provide a useful way of better understanding markets, including
through any framework for more advanced evidence-gathering and analysis, and addressing
It could also allow for efficient
any market failures using flexible and creative remedies.
consolidation of complaints, expedite evidence-based inquiry by including all relevant market
participants in an investigation.  

Evidence will continue to be core to the question of whether or not firms are competing on the
merits. For example,
integration between different products or services can promote or
restrict competition. Our experience has been that telling the difference often requires a
detailed, case-by-case and fact-based assessment of the effects on consumer welfare. It may,
therefore, make more sense to adapt existing antitrust tools and procedures to allow
assessments to be carried out more swiftly and effectively. This could be achieved, for
example, through organisational and procedural changes that enable more efficient (and
shorter) proceedings, and by setting up specialised teams with the expertise to assess
complex technical matters. Where needed, antitrust investigations could be fortified by: (i)
targeted use of interim measures; (ii) well-designed remedies; (iii) intervention against specific,
harmful forms of conduct (complemented by updated guidance); and (iv) use of a new tool
along the lines of the proposed NCT. 

Finally, we note that engaged dialogue between firms and regulators can lead to change,
outside formal investigations. For example, following discussions with the Commission, Google
launched choice carousels to enhance the visibility of rival search services and provide
additional choice for consumers. Google displays choice carousels that list third party search
services above specialised results for flights, hotels,
In these
carousels, Google shows links to search services, together with logos or images, in a scrollable
horizontal row. These carousels give users additional choices without depriving them of the
benefits of the specialised results. 

local businesses, and jobs.

We expand on this response in the ​accompanying paper ​uploaded in response to this
consultation. 

25. Do you think that such a new competition tool (that would not establish an infringement
by a company and would not result in fines) should also be able to prevent structural
competition problems from arising and thus allow for early intervention in the markets
concerned? 

Yes​ | No | Not applicable / no relevant experience or knowledge 

25.1. Please explain your answer. Please indicate which structural competition problems
the new tool should prevent. 

3000 character(s) maximum  

We understand that the Commission contemplates using the NCT both ex post, i.e. to identify
and address competition concerns in a market with a structural lack of competition, and also

68 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
on an ex ante basis, i.e. to identify and address such concerns where there is a structural risk to
competition.  

When investigating ex ante risks, there is inherent uncertainty as to whether harm will arise, in
particular in fast-moving digital markets characterised by high levels of investment and
innovation. Accordingly, such intervention should involve a case-by-case assessment before
any ex ante remedy (or indeed ex ante regulation) is put in place. Otherwise there is a risk of
chilling innovation to the detriment of consumers. Under existing case law, the Commission has
to meet a high standard when intervening against prospective harms;
this can only be met
through a case-by-case assessment. 

We thus consider that the contemplated NCT is a useful way of better understanding markets,
including through a framework for more advanced evidence-gathering and analysis. This
makes the NCT the correct tool to conduct an assessment of markets where there is a
structural risk to competition, as it can consider the evidence on a case-by-case basis before
making ex ante interventions to avoid structural risks to competition materialising into a
structural lack of competition.  

We discuss the remedies framework further below but we note here that ex ante intervention
to address structural risks to competition should be accompanied by a suitable remedies
framework which allows measures which steer market developments away from competition
issues towards a more competitive outcome. For example, following its retail banking market
investigation the CMA implemented ‘Open Banking’, a means of sharing consumer and SME
banking data amongst providers using an API so as to encourage entry and switching. Such
interventions can allow markets to develop into more competitive structures (or avoid
developing into anti-competitive structures) without further intervention including intrusive
changes to existing market structures.  

Staged interventions can also be an effective means of tackling such issues - see our
discussion of the approach of the CMA in its “Online platforms and digital advertising market
study” in response to questions 30-32 below. 

We expand on this response in the ​accompanying paper ​uploaded in response to this
consultation. 

26. What are in your view the most important structural competition problems that should
be tackled with such a new competition tool? 

3000 character(s) maximum 

It is likely that structural concerns in markets will vary market-to-market, and may change over
time. Thus what may be important for competition in one market may not be important for
competition in another market. As such, flexibility and future proofing will be important
considerations in the design of a NCT. 

69 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
27. In your view, what should be the basis for intervention for the new competition tool? 

The tool should be dominance-based (i.e. it shall only be applicable to dominant companies
within the meaning of Article 102 of the EU Treaty) 

The tool should focus on structural competition problems and thus be potentially applicable
to all undertakings in a market (i.e. including dominant but also non-dominant companies). 

Other 

Not applicable /no relevant experience or knowledge 

27.1. Please explain your answer. Please indicate what type of situations would be covered
by the scope of application you suggested. 

3000 character(s) maximum  

In terms of whether the NCT should be limited to dominant companies only, we note Executive
Vice President Vestager’s comments that “The rules we have today can’t stop big companies
from pushing markets towards the tipping point, unless those companies are already dominant
in a market. And that isn’t just an issue in digital markets. In the last two decades, four-fifths of
Europe’s industries have become more concentrated, with the biggest companies taking an
ever larger share of the market.”   

We agree with this sentiment, and note that setting dominance as a threshold for intervention
raises the risk of the NCT not being able to address structural (rather than firm-specific)
competition problems. 

We expand on this response in the ​accompanying paper ​uploaded in response to this
consultation. 

28. In your view, what shall be ​the scope of the new competition tool​? 

It shall be applicable to all markets (i.e. it should be horizontal in nature) 

It shall be limited in scope to sectors/markets where structural competition problems are
the most prevalent and/or most likely to arise 

Other 

Not applicable / no relevant experience or knowledge 

28.1. Please explain your answer. If you indicated 'limited in scope', please indicate what
sectors/markets should be covered by the new competition tool, and why. 

3000 character(s) maximum  

70 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
In terms of whether the NCT should apply to all or a limited category of markets, we consider it
a valid question as to whether legislation could identify sufficiently precisely the sectors to be
covered by the NCT in a way that can take account of future market developments, particularly
in fast-paced and technology-driven industries. By contrast, a generally applicable NCT could
provide the Commission with sufficient
flexibility to address structural and other
competition-related issues. 

28.2. Do you consider that the new competition tool should apply only to markets/sectors
affected by digitisation? 

Yes | No | ​Not applicable / no relevant experience or knowledge  

29. If a new competition tool were to be introduced, how should a smooth interaction with
existing sector specific legislation (e.g. telecom services, financial services) be ensured? 

3000 character(s) maximum  

In terms of how the NCT would interact with a range of existing rules and regulations, we note
that minimising duplication between different legislation is important so as to enhance legal
certainty. As we identified in our IIA response, some considerations governing whether or not a
new tool ought to be deployed may include: 

(1) EU vs national regimes: how the NCT will interact with equivalent tools at the Member State
level, the role of subsidiarity, the risk of conflicting outcomes, and whether a ‘one-stop-shop’
principle may be appropriate;  

(2) Interaction with the current sector inquiry regime: the Commission appears to envisage the
current EU sector inquiry regime continuing to exist in parallel. The Commission should
consider the basis on which it would choose between a sector inquiry or deploying the NCT,
and whether there is scope for formalising the interaction between the two tools;  

(3) Interaction with other EU legislation ( e.g., Article 101/102): the Commission posits that the
NCT will be used to address structural competition problems that cannot adequately be
addressed by the existing legislation. The consultation could therefore consider how and at
what stage in an investigation it will identify whether it is appropriate to proceed with the NCT
or other EU legislation (for example, one option would be to draw inspiration from the UK
market investigation regime, where the CMA’s guidance provides that it will not make a market
investigation reference where an investigation under the Competition Act (containing the UK
domestic equivalents of Articles 101 and 102) is more appropriate); and 

(4) Interaction with ex ante regulation: the consultation could also consider how the NCT and
any ex ante regulation (including the new regulation discussed in this paper) will interact and
how it will design the overall regime so as to ensure legal certainty. In particular, to provide
certainty and predictability for businesses, it will be important to minimise overlaps so that
companies do not have to confront multiple regulatory regimes with the same aim. 

71 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Done well, targeted enforcement combined with sector specific regulation can be an effective
means of delivering change. The implementation of ‘Open Banking’ in the UK following the
CMA’s retail banking market investigation and its interaction with the Second Payment Services
Directive is an example of this.  

We expand on this response in the ​accompanying paper ​uploaded in response to this
consultation.  

30. Do you consider that under the new competition tool the Commission should be able
to: 

Yes  No 

Not applicable /no 
relevant experience or 
knowledge 

Make non-binding recommendations to companies (e.g.
proposing codes of conducts and best practices) 

x 

Inform and make
sectorial regulators 

recommendations/proposals

to

x 

Inform and make legislative recommendations 

Impose remedies on companies to deal with identified
and demonstrated structural competition problems 

x 

x 

30.1. Please explain your answers indicating why you consider that the new competition
tool should include or not include the options above. 

3000 character(s) maximum  

The NCT potentially applies to a broad range of market sectors and a broad range of potential
concerns. Further, as set out in response to Qs 27 and 28 above, Google would support the
NCT being adopted in the broadest form proposed by the Commission, applying to all sectors
of the economy and all markets in which structural competition problems may be present,
without requiring dominance as a threshold for intervention.  

Against that background, we support inclusion in the legislation of each of the four options
posited by the Commission in Q30, and, within the Commission’s ability to impose remedies,

72 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the three options posited in Q31. An appropriate range of remedial tools is important to
ensuring that the remedy framework can effectively address structural competition problems
whilst also preserving existing market dynamics that do not contribute to those problems, as
we set out in our response to the IIA. I.e. in designing the remedies framework the Commission
should be guided by the principles of effectiveness, proportionality and flexibility.  

As we explained in our response to the IIA, an important issue the Commission should consider
when designing the provisions which will permit it to impose remedies is the legal test and
evidentiary standard that will apply. When imposing remedies, precedents exist in a number of
regimes, for example the ‘Adverse Effect on Competition’ test applicable in the UK market
investigation regime, or the ‘Significant Impediment to Effective Competition’ test in the EU
Merger Regulation. Both of these examples carry extensive jurisprudence on both the legal test
and the associated evidentiary standard. Google would also support the adoption of flexible
standards, with higher standards applicable for stricter or more interventionist remedies. 

Whilst we support the NCT being supported by a broad range of remedial tools, we consider
that it is important that those tools are utilised within the correct confines. Part of this is
satisfying the appropriate legal test as we note above. In addition, the Commission should not
use the NCT to introduce remedies (or a series of remedies) that better fall within the purview
of new legislation following the appropriate legislative procedure. Seeking to address through
antitrust enforcement matters which are better dealt with through legislation can produce
potentially prolonged periods of legal uncertainty and poor outcomes.  

We expand on this response in the ​accompanying paper ​uploaded in response to this
consultation. 

31. Do you consider that in order to address the aforementioned structural competition
problems, the Commission should be able to impose appropriate and proportionate
remedies on companies? If yes, which? 

Non-structural remedies (such as obligation to abstain
from certain commercial behaviour) 

Structural
granting access to key infrastructure or inputs) 

remedies (for

instance, divestitures or

Yes  No 

Not applicable /no 
relevant experience or 
knowledge 

x 

x 

Hybrid remedies
obligations and bans) 

(containing different

types of

x 

73 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
31.1. Please explain your answer and why you indicated or not indicated the remedies listed
above. 

3000 character(s) maximum  

As set out in response to question 30.1, we are supportive of the NCT being accompanied by a
broad range of remedial tools. We would however note that the imposition of structural
remedies should be a last resort following rigorous analysis.  

Structural remedies are potentially highly draconian and risk significant adverse effects on
incentives to invest and attendant chilling effects on innovation. They also risk unintended
consequences and potentially adverse future market developments (i.e. they risk “throwing the
baby out with the bathwater” ). This is particularly so in rapidly developing sectors, as for
example ‘digitised’ sectors typically are. If the target of a structural remedy is not sufficiently
stable, implementing it may carry costs that outweigh any benefits of intervention. 

Accordingly, the imposition of structural remedies should be subject to a suitably high legal
threshold and evidentiary burden. The Commission should proceed cautiously, only imposing
structural remedies where it is satisfied that intervention is justified and no other solution is
available (including where appropriate pursuing other, less intrusive, remedial measures first as
outlined above).  

The Commission should consider how to deploy the remedial tools at its disposal to adjust the
degree of intervention it adopts overtime so as to ensure that the appropriate balance
between addressing competitive harm and preserving non-problematic existing market
characteristics is consistently struck overtime. 

Part of this will
involve the Commission considering how to readily permit revision or
revocation of remedies. As we noted in response to the IIA, this will be of particular importance
in dynamic markets where market developments may render remedial measures no longer
appropriate.
likely be scenarios where it is appropriate for the
Commission to introduce remedies on a phased basis, beginning with the least intrusive
measures and giving such measures adequate opportunities to deliver competitive change
before introducing further measures. 

In addition, there will

A staged approach to remedy implementation is just one way the Commission can ensure that
the appropriate balance is struck between addressing potential concerns and preserving
existing market dynamics which do not contribute to these concerns. We acknowledge it may
not be appropriate in all circumstances, particularly where prompt action may be needed.
However, it does illustrate the value in a broad range of remedial options, and the valuable
flexibility in approach that would be lost if the legislation is cast narrowly. 

We expand on this response in the ​accompanying paper ​uploaded in response to this
consultation.  

74 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
32. Do you consider that certain structural competition problems can only be dealt with by
structural remedies, such as the divestment of a business? 

Yes | No | Not applicable / no relevant experience or knowledge |​ ​Other 

 If you indicated "Other", please explain. 

3000 character(s) maximum  

The result of the broad scope of the NCT, is that it would be applicable to a potentially very
broad range of structural competition problems. One virtue of a properly designed and
implemented NCT is that it will allow evidence driven case-by-case assessments of potential
structural competition problems and the measures, if any, required to remedy such problems
which may include, as a measure of last resort, structural remedies. We accordingly caution
against seeking to identify at the outset potential candidates for the imposition of structural
remedies. 

E. Institutional Set-Up of a New Competition Tool 

The questions in this section seek feedback on what features and set-up the new competition
tool should have. 

33. Do you consider that enforcement of the new competition tool by the Commission
would require adequate and appropriate investigative powers in order to be effective? 

Yes​ | No | Not applicable / no relevant experience or knowledge 

33.1. Please explain your answer. 

3000 character(s) maximum  

Given that the contemplated NCT could provide a useful way of better understanding markets
and addressing any market failures using flexible and creative remedies, robust information
gathering powers are essential.  

The legal test and the evidential standard the Commission proposes to adopt for the NCT
should arguably guide the information gathering powers it proposes to have when
investigating under that tool, so that it has the powers it needs to obtain the evidence
necessary to meet that standard.  

In principle these information gathering powers should match those that the Commission has
in the context of antitrust (including its existing powers in relation to sector enquiries) / merger
investigations. Further, adopting such powers into the NCT would enable to import the
experience, guidance and jurisprudence it has developed using such powers into its use of the
new tool. 

75 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
We note that responding to any regulatory investigation can be burdensome on all parties
involved. When exercising its powers we thus encourage the Commission to take into account
the burden that investigations have on undertakings, and especially on SMEs. 

33.2. Please indicate what type of investigative powers would be adequate and appropriate
to ensure the effectiveness of the new competition tool. Please rate each of the listed
investigative powers according to its importance. 

No 
knowledge 
/No 
experience 

No 
importance 
/No 
relevance 

Somewhat 
important 

Important 

Very 
important 

Addressing 
requests
information
companies, 
including
obligation
reply 

for
to

an
to

Imposing 
penalties for not
replying
to
for
requests
information 

for

Imposing 
penalties
providing 
incomplete
misleading 
in
information
reply to requests
for information 

or

to

power

The
interview 
company 
management 
and personnel 

x 

x 

x 

x 

76 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Imposing 
penalties for not
to
submitting
interviews 

power

to
expert

The
obtain
opinions 

power

The
carry
inspections
companies 

to
out
at

Imposing 
penalties for not
to
submitting
inspections
at
companies 

x 

x 

x 

x 

33.3. Please explain your answer. Please also list here any other investigative powers that
you would consider appropriate to ensure the effectiveness of the new competition tool. 

3000 character(s) maximum 

Please see the response to Question 33.1.  

34. Do you consider that the new competition tool should be subject to binding legal
deadlines? 

Yes​ | No | Not applicable / no relevant experience or knowledge 

34.1. Please explain your answer, including the resulting benefits and drawbacks. If you
replied yes, please specify the type of deadlines. 

3000 character(s) maximum  

In principle binding legal deadlines would be valuable, both to ensure certainty for undertakings
and in keeping with the Commission’s desire to act quickly. However, deadlines should not be
so short so as to curtail proper investigations. 

77 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
35. Do you consider that the new competition tool should include the possibility to impose
interim measures in order to pre-empt irreparable harm? 

Yes​ | No | Not applicable / no relevant experience or knowledge 

35.1. Please explain your answer. 

3000 character(s) maximum  

As we set out in our response to the IIA, rather than adopting an ex ante regulatory framework,
it may be more appropriate to adapt existing antitrust tools and procedures to allow
assessments to be carried out more swiftly and effectively. We suggested that one element of
this may be fortifying antitrust investigations by the targeted use of interim measures only for
obvious and egregious abuses that cause serious and irreparable harm. We also suggested
intervention against
other fortifying measures, where needed: well-designed remedies;
specific, harmful forms of self-preferencing (complemented by updated guidance); and use of
a new tool along the lines of the proposed NCT. A further example we provided was for
organisational and procedural changes that enable more efficient (and shorter) proceedings,
and the setting up specialised teams with the expertise to assess complex technical matters. 

To include the possibility to impose interim measures in the NCT, we encourage the
Commission to clearly identify a gap between interim measures in antitrust investigations on
the one hand and ex ante enforcement via the NCT on the other. Otherwise, the overlapping
regimes may lead to legal uncertainty. 

In designing an interim measures regime, we encourage the Commission to have regard to the
same overall factors as we suggest for the remedies regime, i.e. flexibility, effectiveness and
proportionality. Particularly, for interim measures it will be important to ensure that measures
are withdrawn when no longer necessary, or where the burden of having them in place
outweighs their benefits. 

We expand on this response in the ​accompanying paper ​uploaded in response to this
consultation. 

36. Do you consider that the new competition tool should include the possibility to accept
voluntary commitments by the companies operating in the markets concerned to address
identified and demonstrated structural competition problems? 

Yes​ ​| No | Not applicable / no relevant experience or knowledge 

36.1. Please explain your answer. 

3000 character(s) maximum  

Google supports enabling the Commission to accept voluntary remedies, as is the case in its
including at different stages of the process (analogous to
Article 101/102 investigations,
offering commitments to avoid a reference to Phase 2 in merger control, or the ‘undertakings

78 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
in lieu’ in the UK market investigation regime). This would ensure flexibility and proportionality
in the regime. 

We expand on this response in the ​accompanying paper ​uploaded in response to this
consultation. 

37. Do you consider that during the proceedings the companies operating in the markets
concerned, or suppliers and customers of those companies should have the possibility to
comment on the findings of the existence of a structural competition problem before the
final decision? 

Yes​ ​| No | Not applicable / no relevant experience or knowledge 

37.1. Please explain your answer. 

3000 character(s) maximum  

The existing European Union competition laws contain robust procedural safeguards to ensure
the rights of defence of undertakings concerned and encourage high quality decision making.
This practice, supported by the robust judicial review of the European Courts, is an important
part of ensuring the Commission’s status as a leading global competition enforcer. In designing
the NCT, the Commission should have regard to how it can ensure consistency with that
regulatory tradition.  

The nature of procedural safeguards necessary will depend on the scope of application of the
proposed NCT. Assuming that the Commission would have the power to impose interventionist
remedies at the end of its proceedings, the rights of entities subject to those proceedings
should be akin to those in Regulation 1/2003 for Article 101/102 investigations (which also brings
with it related experience, guidance and jurisprudence).  

The right to be heard and access to file are essential, especially for undertakings to whom
remedies may apply. As with Article 101/102 investigations, this would therefore include the
right to comment on the Commission’s findings prior to the final decision, and to comment on
the appropriateness and proportionality of the envisaged remedies, to respect the right to be
heard.  

We expand on this response in the ​accompanying paper ​uploaded in response to this
consultation. 

38. Do you consider that during the proceedings the companies operating in the markets
concerned, or suppliers and customers of those companies should have the possibility to
comment on the appropriateness and proportionality of the envisaged remedies? 

Yes​ | No | Not applicable / no relevant experience or knowledge 

79 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
38.1. Please explain your answer. 

3000 character(s) maximum  

Please see the response to Question 37.1.  

39. Do you consider that the new competition tool should be subject to adequate
procedural safeguards, including judicial review? 

Yes​ | No | Not applicable / no relevant experience or knowledge 

39.1. Please explain your answer. 

3000 character(s) maximum  

Another essential part of the European competition law regulatory tradition is proper judicial
oversight. For this to be effective,
it requires clearly defined legal tests and evidential
standards so that the Commission’s decision making can be properly scrutinised. Therefore it
is important that these are detailed in the legislation. As we noted in our response to the IIA,
when it comes to the imposition of remedies, examples of potential precedents include the
‘Adverse Effect on Competition’ test applicable in the UK market investigation regime, or the
‘Significant Impediment to Effective Competition’ test in the EU Merger Regulation. There is
extensive jurisprudence in respect of each of these tests which could inform the design of the
applicable legal threshold for imposing remedies under the NCT.  

In designing the regime, the Commission may wish to consider the role of the EU courts, which
is particularly important to ensure protection of rights where remedies are imposed, but also
whether the Commission would be required to issue an appealable decision following
complaints and/or at other preliminary stages. 

39.2. Please indicate which further procedural safeguards you would consider necessary. 

3000 character(s) maximum  

Please see our response to Questions 37.1 and 39.1.  

F. Concluding Questions  

40. Taking into consideration the parallel consultation on a proposal in the context of the
Digital Services Act package for ex ante rules to ensure that markets characterised by
large platforms with significant network effects acting as gatekeepers remain fair and
contestable for innovators, businesses, and new market entrants, please rate the

80 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
suitability of each option below to address market issues raised by online platform
ecosystems. 

Not 
effective 

Somewhat 
effective 

Sufficiently 
effective 

Very 
effective 

Most 
effective 

Not applicable 
/No relevant 
experience or 
knowledge 

are
to

Current

1.
competition 
rules
enough
address 
issues raised
in
digital
markets 

2. There is a
need for an
additional 
regulatory 
framework 
imposing 
obligations 
and 
prohibitions 
that
generally 
applicable to 
all
online
platforms 
with 
gatekeeper 
power 

are

x 

x 

81 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
x 

x 

x 

3. There is a
need for an
additional 
regulatory 
framework 
allowing
for
the possibility
to
impose
tailored 
remedies on
individual 
large
platforms 
with 
gatekeeper 
power on a
case-by-case 
basis. 

online

4. There is a
need for a
New 
Competition 
Tool allowing
address
to
structural 
risks and lack
of 
competition 
in
(digital)
markets on a
case-by-case 
basis 

5. There is a
for
need
combination 
of
or
two
more of the
options 2 to
4. 

40.1. Please explain which of the options, or combination of these, in your view would be
suitable and sufficient to address the contestability issues arising in the online platforms
ecosystems. 

82 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3000 character(s) maximum 

We believe that a combination of the options listed above could address perceived concerns
relating to digital platforms. Which tool
is most suitable in a given case will depend on the
particular issue at hand. 

42. Do you have any further comments on this initiative on aspects not covered by the
previous questions? 

3000 character(s) maximum  

We agree with the Commission’s view that there may be markets which may experience
anti-competitive outcomes that cannot be addressed effectively by the Commission’s existing
competition law enforcement. In principle there are therefore opportunities for modernisation
of the EU competition rules to enable the Commission to engage in targeted correction of such
outcomes. 

This modernisation need not necessarily be dramatic.
It could be achieved, for example,
through organisational and procedural changes that enable more efficient (and shorter)
antitrust proceedings, and by setting up specialised teams with the expertise to assess
complex technical matters quickly. Where needed, antitrust investigations could be fortified by
(i) targeted use of interim measures; (ii) well-designed remedies; (iii) intervention against
specific, harmful forms of anticompetitive conduct (complemented by updated guidance); and
(iv) use of a new tool along the lines of the proposed NCT which, if appropriately calibrated and
enforced could, in principle, fill an important enforcement gap and ensure pro-competitive
outcomes.  

Such a tool could provide a useful way of better understanding the relevant markets, including
through any framework for more advanced evidence-gathering and analysis, and addressing
any market failures using flexible and creative remedies.  

We have emphasised in this response the need for case-by-case evidence based decision
making. This is particularly important in dynamic markets where predicting outcomes with
reasonable certainty is challenging and where the same market features in seemingly similar
markets can produce highly different outcomes. This also has the effect of making a set of
clearly defined ex ante rules difficult to devise and apply in practice. 

We expand on this response in the ​accompanying paper ​uploaded in response to this
consultation. 

43. Please indicate whether the Commission services may contact you for further details
on the information submitted, if required. 

Yes​ | No 

83 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[END] 

84 

 
 
