Copa-Cogeca 
QJ(20)5955:2-FG/sm 

Ref. Ares(2020)4626559 - 05/09/2020

Copa and Cogeca contribution 

Questionnaire for the public consultation on a New 
Competition Tool 

Copa and Cogeca express their strong concerns about the New Competition Tool (NCT) 
initiative.  

We do not see a gap in the current EU competition rules as argued by the European 
Commission. We are not of the opinion that there are structural competition problems in 
the agricultural and food sector that the current competition rules cannot tackle.  

Therefore, there is no justification for the immense impact that the introduction of an NCT 
would have on EU competition law and for companies affected by these rules. 

Furthermore, we believe that the situations in which the Commission would intervene 
within the framework of this tool are not clear. This applies, in particular, to the 
demarcation between digital and non-digital markets. We strongly encourage an attentive 
consideration and further clarification of the main aspects of the NCT. 

The current discussions and suggested changes to EU competition law are certain due to the 
behaviour of very few, very large and dominant companies, that all have a direct relation to 
consumers. This is a very specific area – best dealt with under the current article 102 TFEU 
tool box - and the issues arising in this setting cannot immediately be transferred to other 
realities. 

The introduction of a NCT instrument would create significant legal uncertainty. If an 
additional instrument was to be introduced at all, it should be very limited in its application. 
Any such specific rules should be clearly defined and limited as much as possible. 

Moreover, there is a risk of a differentiated implementation of this tool across the EU. At 
minima, it will not take into consideration how the business structures, at the level of 
Member States, have been established and evolve. 

We would also like to underline also the need to prevent overlaps between traditional 
competition enforcement, ex ante regulatory framework and the NCT. Therefore, the 
Commission should make clear in the impact assessment potential overlaps and where 
these exist. 

Competition policy is about applying rules to make sure companies compete fairly with each 
other. This encourages entrepreneurship and efficiency, creates a wider choice for 
consumers and helps reduce prices and improve quality. The exclusive focus on consumers 
that is customary under classical competition law pursuant to article 101(3) TFEU cannot be 
the only yardstick for the assessment of cooperation among producers in the agricultural 
sector.  

In this context, we are clearly concerned about the narrowness of the competition test 
envisaged by this tool, which considers the well-being of the consumer as dependent only on 
the low price. As far as agri-food products are concerned, this policy has led very clearly to a 
deflation of the prices of agricultural raw material since these markets have been opened to 
competition.  

Establishing the NCT is worrying for Copa and Cogeca as it would not be efficient for a 
better functioning of the food chain.  

 
 
 
 
 
