UniCredit Group - Internal Use Only 

Ref. Ares(2020)4678762 - 08/09/2020

COMPLIANCE ANTITRUST, BANCASSURANCE & CONSUMER PROTECTION 
CUSTOMER PROTECTION ADVISORY 
GROUP CUSTOMER PROTECTION 

Excerpt of UniCredit’s answers to questions 9.3 and 11.3 of  
Questionnaire for the public consultation on a New Competition Tool 

9.3 Please explain your answer. 

The  current  tools  are  effective  against  collusions,  other  restrictive  conducts,  as  well  as  abuses  by 
dominant firms. Particularly, art. 102 TFEU clearly identifies the prohibited conducts against freedom of 
competition  in  case  of  dominant  position.  The  choice  to  limit  the  prohibition  of  these  conducts  to 
dominant undertakings lies in our view in the need to allow all undertakings, including the smallest one, 
to  grow  and  actually  compete  on  the  market,  also  against  the  biggest  ones,  such  us  dominant 
undertakings. To that purpose (i.e. ensuring free and effective competition) only dominant undertakings 
bear the limitations of article 102 TFEU. Therefore, we believe that the possibility for the Commission to 
take actions for preventing non-dominant undertakings from growing should be avoided, provided that in 
case such growth leads to a dominant position, art. 102 TFEU shall apply.  

In  our  view  the  fact  that  the  NCT  would  broaden  the  Commission’s  scope  for  intervention  in  business 
activities of non-dominant players – that, up to now, is regarded as entirely legitimate and lawful – would 
clash with the well-established legal EU framework and case-law according to which holding or acquiring 
a dominant position is not per se unlawful under EU competition law, i.e. it is not an offence in itself for a 
firm to have a dominant position. What is offensive is to abuse of the position of dominance (see para 1 
of the Communication from the Commission — Guidance on the Commission's enforcement priorities in 
applying  Article  82  of  the  EC  Treaty  to  abusive  exclusionary  conduct  by  dominant  undertakings).  As  is 
well known, the legal expression “dominant position” is a binary term: either an undertaking is dominant 
and therefore subject to art. 102 and the “special responsibility” not to hinder competition on the market 
that it entails; or it is not, in which case its unilateral behavior is not subject to competition law scrutiny 
at all.  By  imposing  possible  far  reaching  behavioral and/or  structural remedies  on  non-dominant  firms, 
the  Commission  would  attribute  to  every  market-player  that  “special  responsibility”  which  has  been 
routinely repeated in the judgements of the EU Courts and the decisions of the Commission on art. 102 
and  always  attributed  to  dominant  players  only.  The  NCT  could  therefore  become  a  notable  departure 
from decades of competition law enforcement. 

Furthermore, if EU competition rules are applied too aggressively, by making them over-inclusive (as the 
NCT  seems  to  propose),  firms  might  refrain  from  conducts  which  are  pro-competitive.  In  this  respect, 
action against any alleged detrimental effects on the market due to a lack of competition would have to 
take account of any risks related to over-enforcement and a higher likelihood of false positives. 

Finally, acting against unilateral conducts of non-dominant firm would affect the ultimate function of the 
public enforcement of competition law, namely safeguarding the process of competition as a means of 
enhancing  consumer  welfare  (see  SPEECH/05/537  23.09.2005  of  former  Commission  Neelie  Kroes), 
which would turn into protecting competitors, including inefficient ones.    

Needless  to  say,  as  for  the  agreements  between  competitors  (horizontal)  or  between  non  competing 
undertakings (vertical), art. 101 TFUE and the Commission’s communications and case law clarify already 
that those may be triggered not only by an actual contract or an informal arrangement between those 
undertakings. Even an exchange of commercially sensitive information, or a unilateral disclosure of such 
information may fall within the restrictions (and sanctions) set forth by art. 101 of the Treaty (and the 
subsequent  sanctions).  Therefore,  it  would  be  hard  to  understand  in  which  extent  such  tools  already 
prohibiting any kind of collusion between undertakings may be further enlarged. 

Doubts may also be raised that the NCT, as proposed in the consultation, could be introduced based on 
the current rules of the Treaty (e.g. art. 103). In fact, some commentators noted that art. 103 TFEU cannot 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
UniCredit Group - Internal Use Only 

COMPLIANCE ANTITRUST, BANCASSURANCE & CONSUMER PROTECTION 
CUSTOMER PROTECTION ADVISORY 
GROUP CUSTOMER PROTECTION 

be a legal basis for introducing new conducts, i.e. to punish behaviours falling outside arts. 101 and 102 
TFEU: in fact, the NCT would go beyond arts. 101 and 102. As a result, if the proposed competition new 
tools have to be given to the Commission, arguably this will need an amendment to the Treaty.  

As said above, any further power could be too undefined and broad and as such reduce the certainty and 
foreseeability of the application of antitrust rules. 

Since, as said above, the proposed new rules, introducing the NCT, may leave room for uncertainty and 
unpredictability  of  the  application  of  competition  law,  this  could  expose  DG  Comp  to  a  lot  of  pressure 
from  public  and  private  powers.  In  fact,  (i)  it  would  be  hard  to  understand,  ex  ante,  which  conduct  is 
antitrust compliant and which is not, and (ii) in any case of alleged market failure, DG Comp would be 
called to “enter the arena” and fix it. 
Competition  law  if  not  a  tool  for  the  optimization/fine-tuning  of  market  outcomes:  the  proposed  NCT 
could change this, having an impact on the nature itself of competition law. One could want this or not, 
yet it is necessary to understand that the introduction of such a tool could have this effect. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
UniCredit Group - Internal Use Only 

COMPLIANCE ANTITRUST, BANCASSURANCE & CONSUMER PROTECTION 
CUSTOMER PROTECTION ADVISORY 
GROUP CUSTOMER PROTECTION 

11.3. Please explain your answer. 

In  our  view,  in  certain  markets  it  is  quite  hard  to  figure  undertakings  causing  themselves  “structural 
competition problems”, which are not holding a dominant position on the market. Should such situation 
happen, i.e. non-dominant undertakings affect directly the market causing, or relying on, such “structural 
competition problems”, we observe the following: 

 

 

in  the  lack of  a  dominant position, the  commercial conducts  of  undertakings  willing  to  extend 
their market position to related markets, increase their  market power or market share, develop 
new  or  innovative  products  (also  relying  on  new  technologies),  rely  on  economies  of  scale,  or 
offering lower prices etc. which naturally harm competitors, should not be considered unlawful, 
as the will of market operators to grow and strengthen their business cannot be considered anti-
competitive, unless this leads to the abuse of a dominant position pursuant to art. 102 TFEU; 

the opportunity envisaged by the Commission to impose behavioural or structural measures on 
undertakings in the lack of an abuse of dominant position pursuant to art. 102 TFEU appears to 
be  an  excessive  remedy.  On  the  one  hand,  such  measures  could  affect  the  undertakings 
concerned  beyond  the  intentions  of  the  Commission,  with  the  potential  exclusion  of  efficient 
market  players  from  the  market;  on  the  other  hand  such  measures  may  advantage  other 
undertakings, which could then be subject to the same measures, thus leading to extra-regulated 
market, to detriment of the principle of freedom of competition on the merits. 

Therefore, we believe that art. 101 and 102 TFEU are effective to fight anti-competitive behavior without 
hindering the growth of non-dominant undertakings. Please also refer to par. 9.3 above 

In addition, we remark that the enforcement of EU competition law by the Commission goes in parallel 
with the enforcement made by national authorities and local applicable laws to protect fair competition 
on the market. In this respect, we deem worthy to mention that in Italy the rules on “abuse of economic 
dependence” pursuant to art. 9 of the law n. 192/1998, already address those concerns raised by the NCT 
on abusive conducts put in place by non-dominant undertakings. In particular, this provision prohibits the 
abuse by one or more companies of the state of economic dependence, defined as "situation in which an 
undertaking  is  able  to  cause,  in  its  commercial  relations  with  another  undertaking,  an  excessive 
imbalance of rights and obligations. Economic dependence shall also be assessed taking into account the 
real possibility for the party subject to abuse, to find satisfactory alternatives on the market. Abuse may 
also  consist  in  a  refusal  to  sell  or  a  refusal  to  buy,  the  imposition  of  unjustifiably  onerous  or 
discriminatory contractual conditions, or the arbitrary interruption of existing commercial relations". The 
rules on abuse of economic dependence award to the Italian Competition Authority the power to activate 
its  investigation  powers  and  impose  sanctions.  According  to  the  national  case-law,  the  “abuse  of 
economic  dependence”  has  general  application,  suitable  for  including  any  asymmetrical  negotiation 
relationship between companies, without the need to assess the existence of a dominant position. 

Moreover,  as  said  already,  as  for  the  agreements  between  competitors  (horizontal)  or  between  non 
competing  undertakings  (vertical), art.  101  TFUE  and  the  communications  and  case  law  clarify  already 
that those may be triggered not only by an actual contract or an informal arrangement between those 
undertakings. Even an exchange of commercially sensitive information, or a unilateral disclosure of such 
information may fall within the restrictions (and sanctions) set forth by art. 101 of the Treaty. Therefore, 
it  would  be  hard  to  understand  in  which  extent  such  tools  already  prohibiting  any  kind  of  collusion 
between undertakings may be further enlarged 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
