Vodafone Group response to the public consultation on a New Competition Tool 
Question 41 – additional information 

Ref. Ares(2020)4717068 - 09/09/2020

This document contains our responses to questions 9.1, 10.3, 12.2, 18.8, 18.10 and 24.1 of the 
questionnaire. 

9.1. Please explain your answer. If you replied yes, please also indicate the type of intervention that 
would be needed.  

We believe there is a need for intervention in digital markets where platforms act as  gatekeepers in the 
form of targeted ex ante regulation of digital gatekeeper platforms, as set out in Vodafone’s separate 
response to the Commission’s current consultation on the proposed Digital Services Act (DSA). Whether or not 
an additional legal instrument to the DSA is necessary to address structural competition problems is largely 
going to be a function of how wide in scope and effective in practice the DSA is likely to be, it being understood 
that the P2B Regulation already constitutes an initial (but incomplete) regulatory step in that direction. There 
needs to be a balance between the addition of new regulatory tools which can complement the work of 
competition rules and the need to not over-regulate to the point where innovation might be impaired.   

In addition to targeted ex ante regulation, we consider that the Commission should review and update certain 
of its current competition law guidelines and notices in order to ensure that they are fit for purpose for the 
modern, digital economy. For example, we support the (ongoing) consultation on the Commission’s Notice on 
Market Definition, and believe it is also necessary to review and update the Article 102 Enforcement Priorities 
Guidelines, the Horizontal and Vertical Guidelines, the Horizontal Merger Guidelines (in particular on innovation 
effects) and Non-Horizontal Merger Guidelines (in particular on conglomerate effects).  This is necessary to 
provide businesses with greater certainty and increase the competitiveness of European firms that could 
challenge current gatekeeper platforms in certain markets and could compete more effectively in other 
emerging digital markets. It is also necessary because both companies and the Commission currently lack 
clear guidance on how EU competition law rules will be applied to new and emerging business models and 
potential theories of harm in the digital economy.  As noted in our response to the Roadmap and IIA for this 
consultation, revised guidance from the Commission should in particular support a more dynamic approach to 
assessing competition in digital markets.  

In addition, we support the increased use of existing powers available to the Commission, including interim 
remedies powers and sector inquiries. The Commission should endeavour to make greater use of these 
powers to better understand markets as they develop and evolve, and to intervene at an early stage, where 
appropriate, in markets characterised by presence of gatekeeper platforms which are prone to leveraging, anti-
competitive monopolisation strategies, tipping, etc. In our view, the competition problems arising in these 
markets can be tackled by enforcing existing antitrust law more frequently and in a more timely manner and 
targeted ex ante regulation of digital markets where gatekeepers have undermined or eliminated 
contestability. To the extent that the DSA introduces market monitoring obligations, it is arguable that 
enforcement of the current competition laws would be more effective.  

We believe that introducing a new competition tool carries a significant risk of over-enforcement which distorts 
competitive outcomes (in particular by chilling investment and innovation).  Vodafone therefore considers that 
the Commission should: (a) proceed with the implementation of targeted ex ante regulation to tackle the 
specific concerns which arise in markets characterised by the presence of gatekeeper platforms; and (b) make 
more use of and update its existing competition law tools and guidance.   In addition, the Commission should 
consider (again, as an alternative to a New Competition Tool) widening the scope of its existing powers 
under Regulation 1/2003 to enable it to make recommendations to companies, sectoral regulators and 
legislators following sector inquiries, which would seem to be a more proportionate and legitimate way to 
proceed.. We do not believe there is a need currently for any additional  form of  intervention, including 
one that takes the form of the proposed “New Competition Tool”, which should only be pursued if the 
measures referred to above, once implemented, prove to be ineffective and once the results of current Court 
appeals in the various digital platform cases have been resolved. 

C2 General 

 
 
Vodafone Group response to the public consultation on a New Competition Tool 
Question 41 – additional information 

10.3. Please provide examples and explain them. 

Vodafone considers that at least some of the examples cited in response to question 8.2 above could also be 
viewed as forms of anti-competitive abusive practices which can be captured by an acknowledged theory of 
harm. 

In addition, and as also explained in our separate response to the DSA consultation, Vodafone has been 
adversely affected by the imposition of certain unfair contractual terms and unfair practices by 
gatekeeper digital platforms or eco-systems, including: 

a.  The imposition of ‘high impact terms’, such as uncapped liability. This has the effect of increasing our 
exposure to liability in way that results in an unfair distribution of liability across the value chain. 

b.  The requirement to license all IPRs at no cost for the use of the digital gatekeeper’s proprietary products. 
As a result of such practices, Vodafone is unable to effectively monetise and develop digital products and 
services that could challenge the digital gatekeeper’s own propriety products and services.  

c.  No notice given of technical changes to platforms, which then requires apps to be amended, in some 
cases resulting in lack of functionality. By not being provided with such advance notice, Vodafone is left 
exposed to technical issues that can stop services working and harm its reputation with customers. This 
can also impact functionality which may affect Vodafone’s compliance with regulatory requirements.   

d.  Opt-in consents inserted into the Vodafone app experience, which has the effect of increasing friction and 
harming the overall customer experience, while at the same time not  adding meaningful controls on how 
end user data is ultimately to be collected and monetised by  digital gatekeepers.  

e.  Unreasonable transfers of liability to the app developer (i.e., Vodafone) without mutual liability being 

accepted by the platform owner. This shifting of the financial risk burden solely on to the developer results 
in an unfair distribution of liability throughout the value chain, thereby making it harder for end users to 
seek redress and penalising backend developers of apps.  

f.  Other unreasonable terms, in relation to the provision of Vodafone services or adjacent 

obligations such as marketing, which impose a disproportionate cost to Vodafone.  

We are also aware of a broader range of unfair commercial terms and unfair practices that foreclose 
competitors in relation to various markets for digital products and services, including:  

a.  Bundling and tying, as occurred in the Microsoft case concerning the bundling of Internet Explorer with 
the Windows operating system, and in the Google Android case concerning, among other matters, the 
Commission’s finding of tying of the Google search app and Google Chrome browser with Google’s Play 
Store. 

b.  Exclusive dealing, as occurred according to the Commission’s decision in Google Adsense concerning 

the requirement that Google’s customers sign exclusively with Adsense, which the Commission found had 
the effect of foreclosing rivals in online search advertising mediation. 

c.  Self-preferencing practices in favour of a platform or eco-system’s own services, as the Commission 

found to be the case in Google Shopping concerning the search ranking of Google’s own online shopping 
service 

d.  Discrimination such as that alleged by Spotify and Epic recently against Apple’s (in particular because 

Apple forces developers to charge their customers via the App Store payment system , rather than through 
the developer’s website or some other means) and to share a significant proportion of the revenue with 
Apple, thereby effectively increasing third party developers’ costs and hindering their ability to compete 
with Apple’s own services. 

e.  Predatory pricing or margin squeezes, whereby as-efficient rivals cannot profitably match the dominant 
firm’s prices without incurring the risk that they will exit the market, thereby enabling the dominant firm to 
subsequently earn monopoly profits.  

C2 General 

 
Vodafone Group response to the public consultation on a New Competition Tool 
Question 41 – additional information 

f.  The refusal to supply or license an input, which is important in order for a firm to be able to compete 

effectively in a downstream market. 

g.  Use of superior access to data, which we understand to be the potential concern of the Commission in 
launching an investigation into whether Amazon’s access to data in its role as a merchant platform 
adversely affects downstream competition in online retailing between Amazon and its rivals. (The parallels 
are significant between the proposed DSA regulatory intervention and the approach adopted under Article 
106 TFEU with regard to firms that have a “conflict of interest” in their commercial dealings and their rule-
setting functions, as this conflict fuels self-preferencing practices.) 

h.  Strategies to lock-in customers that can arise from the lack of interoperability or interconnection 

between platforms, including for example the strategies described in response to question 8.2 above. 

Vodafone would be happy to discuss these examples further with the Commission. 

C2 General 

 
 
 
 
Vodafone Group response to the public consultation on a New Competition Tool 
Question 41 – additional information 

12.2. Please identify the markets concerned and explain those market situations. 

We do not agree that a highly concentrated market is problematic per se from a competition perspective.  As 
with other markets, the potential for competition concerns to arise in oligopolistic markets depends on the 
specific characteristics of the market in question.  For example, while a “tight” oligopoly market structure may 
facilitate tacit collusion in certain industries, this depends on a number of factors.  For example, the risk will be 
higher in markets characterised by homogeneous products with high common and transparent cost bases.  
However, concentrated market structures are still likely to produce competitive outcomes where the product 
ranges of market players are diverse and where customers can switch easily and at relatively little cost.     

For example, we note that mobile communications markets (and many other markets with similar or 
comparable characteristics) are not conducive to concerns of this nature.  In this regard, we note the following 
in relation to mobile communications:  

  Operator profitability and return on capital are currently relatively low in these markets (in contrast to 
many digital markets). This is a clear indication of their highly competitive nature. Relatively low 
profitability and return on capital expenditure in telecoms markets where there is competing 
infrastructure does not enable the same financial leverage used to support market power as in digital 
markets. It is only in those telecoms markets where a position of clear market  dominance exists (e.g., 
wholesale fixed access, which is dominated by one fixed incumbent in most countries) that profits are 
raised  and incumbents are regulated while, in those markets that are contestable, profitability is low 
and competition is fierce even under an oligopolistic market structure (e.g., as in the mobile sector). 
The status quo of these markets is “reset” regularly as operators are required to roll out new 
technologies approximately every five to seven years, and there is fierce competition on network 
quality and capacity in the interim. 
There is already well-established and effective sector-specific regulation in place which is based on 
competition law principles.  This regulation applies in addition to the “traditional” competition law 
framework established in Airtours and Impala.   

 

 

  Where operators enter into network sharing or other cooperation arrangements in order to facilitate 
pro-competitive investment and innovation, resulting in the faster and wider rollout of new networks 
and/or services to customers, such arrangements are already effectively policed under antitrust 
and/or merger control rules. 
To the extent that operators in markets have been required by regulators to increase transparency in 
relation to their customer offers, this should not be interpreted as providing a foundation for tacit 
collusion, but as providing the basis for informed end-user decision-making which in turn reduces the 
risk of customers being rendered inert to change. 

 

  Switching is straightforward for customers, as the speed and low cost of number portability facilitates 

customer churn.   

Thus, although the market characteristics typically associated with markets with digital gatekeepers are prone 
to inherent competition concerns, oligopolistic market structures such as those that are well understood in the 
mobile telecommunications sector: 

  Do not display an entrenched lack of competition nor the risk of monopolisation. The General Court 

recently clarified that the mere fact that a market is highly concentrated does not automatically result 
in a significant impediment to effective competition. 

  Are characterised by a different approach to innovation than digital markets, where the need for quick 
intervention is premised on the greater speed and less “structured” form of innovation cycles that 
take place there, along with the cumulative effect of various market features which can cause such 
digital markets to tip.  

C2 General 

 
 
 
 
  
 
Vodafone Group response to the public consultation on a New Competition Tool 
Question 41 – additional information 

Additionally, EU intervention in telecoms mergers has been based on potential unilateral effects and almost 
never on potential coordinated effects. Accordingly, there are no hidden market failures that existing 
competition tools have not been able to address. 

Vodafone’s experience therefore does not suggest that, as a matter of general principle, the Commission 
requires additional tools to tackle potential competition law risks in oligopolistic markets. To the extent that 
such concerns may arise in certain markets based on their specific characteristics, and these cannot be tackled 
under existing competition law rules, the example of the telecommunications sector illustrates that sector-
specific  regulation is probably the most effective means by which address such concerns arising from complex 
oligopoly situations  (as is explained further in response to question 13.1 below).   

Finally, we note that the Inception Impact Assessment for this consultation (the IIA) refers to the increasing 
digitalisation of society and economy which has attracted increasing attention under competition policy, 
specifically “the large platforms [that] have become gatekeepers for many digital and non-digital products and 
services”. Our understanding of the role of a gatekeeper is that it coincides with the accumulation of market 
power increasingly in the hands of one undertaking. This is consistent with the IIA, which refers to certain 
market characteristics (which are typically and in some cases uniquely present in digital markets) which 
underpin this development, including extreme economies of scale and scope, strong network effects, zero 
pricing and data dependency. The IIA identifies that it is specifically against this backdrop that it has engaged in 
a process of reflection on the role of competition policy in order to assess whether the current competition law 
framework allows for intervention that preserves competitive digital markets. Against this backdrop, there is 
nothing that has been put forward in the IIA which suggests that oligopoly market structures are problematic 
per se and/or require intervention in the form of the proposed New Competition Tool to maintain or improve 
competition in those digital markets.   

C2 General 

 
 
 
 
 
Vodafone Group response to the public consultation on a New Competition Tool 
Question 41 – additional information 

18.8. Please explain your answer, indicating why you consider the indicated features relevant for 
qualifying a company as a gatekeeper. Please also add any other relevant features that qualify a 
company as a gatekeeper and rate their importance. 

As set out in our separate response to the DSA consultation, Vodafone considers that there is a need for targeted 
intervention  when  a  range  of  criteria  are  cumulatively  satisfied.  These  criteria  should  encompass  the 
following: 

(i)  a non-contestable and concentrated market structure should be identified; 

(ii)  the digital gatekeeper in question is an unavoidable trading partner; and 

(iii)  the application of competition rules would be ineffective in addressing the identified market failures. 

Each of these criteria are discussed in detail below. 

Criterion 1: Non-contestable Concentrated Market Structure  

Under this first threshold criterion, regulators would need to identify the following elements in the marketplace 
in which the digital platform operates, namely:  

(i) The existence of a well understood and defined digital “platform” or Internet eco-system of products 
that lies above regulated telecommunications networks, which generates direct and indirect network effects 
that might be capable of deterring switching by the creation of “positive feedback loops”, or which is prone to 
the phenomenon of “tipping” in favour of a particular operator (or a very limited group of operators).  

We consider that an online platform accords in principle with an “Information Society service”, as defined in EU 
Directive  2015/1535.  This  would  have  the  following  characteristics:  (i)  the  ability  to  create  and  shape  new 
markets, to challenge traditional ones, and to organise new forms of participation or conducting business based 
on the collection, processing, and editing of large volumes of data; (ii) operating in multi-sided markets, but with 
varying  degrees  of  control  over  direct  interactions  between  groups  of  users;  (iii)  benefitting  from  ‘network 
effects’ where, broadly speaking, the value of the service increases with the number of users; (iv) often relying 
on information and communications technologies to reach their users, instantaneously; (v) playing a key role in 
digital value creation, by capturing significant value (often through data accumulation), which facilitates new 
business ventures but also new strategic dependencies. 

(ii) On the input side of the platform, such platforms would benefit from high entry barriers which, in particular, 
may be due to the control of key innovation capabilities.  

Barriers to expansion or entry can take various forms, particularly in the form of advantages specifically enjoyed 
by the dominant firm such as economies of scale and scope, privileged access to essential inputs, important 
technologies or an established distribution and sales network. 

(iii) On the customers side of the platform, the market position would benefit from the prevalence of the practice 
of single-homing, which may be due to strategic behaviour (e.g., exclusivity clauses, tying, MFNs) or, just as 
effectively, from the non-utilisation of multi-homing options due to consumer inertia.  

In  addition,  when  there  are  elements  of  “free”  provisioning  of  service,  which  may  increase  information 
asymmetries and have the tendency to mask commercial incentives, the rationale for public intervention may 
increase. This can be the case when ‘price’ reflects a digital representation of value, particularly in the form of 
personal data that is provided in exchange for the supply of the services in question. 

Criterion 2: Digital Gatekeeper which is an Unavoidable Trading Partner  

Under this second criterion, the regulated digital platform would have the following commercial and structural 
characteristics:  

C2 General 

 
Vodafone Group response to the public consultation on a New Competition Tool 
Question 41 – additional information 

(i) The digital platform’s business model is associated with the provision of some form of intermediation 
between two types of users across various sides of the platform. This implies that the platform in question allows 
a user to offer goods or services to other users with a view to facilitating transactions between them. 

(ii) The digital platform would act as a “gatekeeper” or as a provider of some form of a “bottleneck facility”, 
which renders it an “unavoidable trading partner” (comparable to a “must have” product in a conglomerate 
market environment) for other operators on that digital platform (which would include a ‘digital eco-system’). 

The satisfaction of this criterion would require that the platform in question has achieved a significant level of 
user uptake and that access seekers depend on the platform to reach a significant body of users. 

(iii)  The  environment  in  which  the  digital  platform  operates  is  characterised  by  a  lack  of  effective 
countervailing bargaining power being exercised by the underlying regulated networks over which the eco-
system operates and by its immediate or end-user customers (depending on the business model deployed).  

Countervailing buying power may result from the relative size of customers or their commercial significance to 
the  dominant  firm,  and  their  ability  to  switch  quickly  to  competing  suppliers.  In  this  way,  new  entry  can  be 
promoted or vertical integration can take place, at least where customers can credibly threaten to do so. 

(iv)  Existing  regulatory  obligations  are  not  effective  in  preventing  the  digital  platform  in  engaging  in 
exclusionary  behaviour.  To  the  extent  that  a  digital  platform  is  exploiting  a  regulatory  loophole,  or  where 
regulation (either asymmetric of symmetric in nature) is not capable of exerting a meaningful market discipline 
on the platform, additional regulatory intervention is likely to be a proportionate response.  

Criterion 3: Ineffectiveness of competition rules  

On the assumption that either a finding of dominance cannot be established in relation to a particular digital 
platform (despite positive findings usually associated with market power) or the identified conduct and effects 
cannot be effectively addressed pursuant to appropriate remedies under ex post competition rules and 
within a reasonable period of time given the speed of technology and market evolution, there is a risk that the 
changes effected to the marketplace are irreversible and the possibility of innovation from other competitors is 
foregone unless regulatory intervention occurs.  

Under the electronic communications regulatory framework, competition law interventions are deemed to be 
insufficient where, for instance, the compliance requirements of an intervention to redress persistent market 
failure(s) are likely to be very detailed or where frequent and/or timely intervention is indispensable. 

Vodafone considers that this approach can best be implemented in the form of targeted ex ante regulation, as 
proposed in the DSA consultation (refer to Vodafone’s separate response to that consultation). 

C2 General 

 
 
 
Vodafone Group response to the public consultation on a New Competition Tool 
Question 41 – additional information 

18.10. Please explain your answers above. Please also use this space to mention any other competition 
concerns that arise in markets featuring a gatekeeper and rate them in importance. 

The practices listed below are commonly seen in markets involving digital gatekeepers, all of which are capable 
of generating competition concerns of varying levels of gravity: 

 

Imposition of unfair and potentially anti-competitive terms and conditions due to strong bargaining 
power vis-à-vis smaller businesses (for example, MFN clauses, restrictions/abusive conditions on data 
sharing and use, exclusivity clauses, obligations regarding IPR). 

  Self-preferencing strategies, where digital platforms often use their gatekeeper role to favour their 
own content, service or advertising (when vertically integrated), or to favour paid-for content by certain 
content providers or advertisers in effect by discriminating against other competing users. This is the 
case, for example, when search and ranking algorithms confer preference to the platform’s own services 
above those of competitors or when the digital platform has an incentive to bias its recommendations 
toward  the  content  provider  charging  a  lower  royalty.  The  fact  that  the  digital  platform  may  have 
superior information about consumer preferences increases the risk of bias. This is also the case when 
the platform does not treat third party applications the same way as its own applications.  

  Leveraging  into  neighbouring  markets  is  a    common  practice  in  markets  with  digital  gatekeepers, 
which    can  rely  on  their  wide  portfolio  of  services  to  leverage  into  neighbouring  markets  where 
competition is foreclosed, or where  their entry alone is capable of  restricting the entry and expansion 
of new entrants (by raising their costs of doing business). 

  Bundling/tying with ‘must have’ services and apps, where the bundling leads to anti-competitive 
foreclosure. Such practices often form part of an “envelopment” strategy, which can often be put into 
effect  by    a  gatekeeper  platform   entering  a  market  by bundling  its  services  in order  to leverage  its 
shared  user  base,  data  or  other  common  components,  thereby  excluding  or  marginalising  other 
competitors in the market. 
  Restricting  content/service 

to  components, 
software/hardware  which  is  critical  to  compete.  It  is  often  the  case,  on  the  grounds  of  introducing 
technical innovations, that digital platforms  compel  competitors to adapt to technological changes 
introduced  by  the  platform,  which  may    different  proprietary  standards  (which  may  not  always  be 
possible for competitors, or for whom such adaptation of technical standards  may be very costly), or by 
requiring payment of an exorbitant price to have access to the standard developed by the platform.  
Another form of problematic conduct occurs  when platform owners fail to provide advance warning of 
planned software updates, which result in harm to the performance of a third party’s business that  is 
operating within the platform’s eco-system (including those situations where they offer services which 
potentially compete with those of the platform operator). 

interoperability  and  restricting  access 

  Limited data portability due to lack of interoperability (e.g., APIs, limits to sharing customer data), 

which creates obstacles for emerging competitors.  

  Single-homing  requirements  and  restrictions  on  multi-homing,  which  involve    consumers  being 
compelled  to use on an exclusive basis (or at least primarily)  the gatekeeper’s eco-system, will usually 
lead to foreclosure risks because  customer switching is being rendered more difficult,  which leads to 
gatekeepers  attaining strong positions in the market where they can, for example, set the conditions 
of access to third parties. 

This leads to foreclosure and poorer competitive outcomes for consumers insofar as: 

  Closed  eco-systems  in  particular  prevent  innovative  new  services  from  emerging,  which  affects 

 

companies of all sizes and is particularly harmful to smaller European companies. 
For European consumers, detrimental impacts occur through the restrictions in choice for products and 
services.  We increasingly see our customers being locked into digital eco-systems, rarely switching, 
while providing ever-increasing amounts of personal data which further ties them into that  eco-system.  

C2 General 

 
 
 
Vodafone Group response to the public consultation on a New Competition Tool 
Question 41 – additional information 

24.1. Please explain your answer. Please indicate which structural competition problems the new 
tool should tackle or address. 

As explained in our response to question 9.1 above, we believe the Commission should: (i) continue with 
its ongoing review of, and make certain important updates to, the existing competition law framework to 
ensure it is fit for purpose; (ii) increase its use of existing powers in relation to interim measures and sector 
inquiries, and (iii) introduce an ex ante regulatory framework for digital gatekeepers , as set out in 
Vodafone’s separate response to the DSA consultation, before considering the need for a New 
Competition Tool. The Commission should only consider further forms of intervention, including any 
potential New Competition Tool, once these reforms have been introduced and assessed, and if they are 
shown to be ineffective in addressing the specific competition problems that the Commission is seeking 
to address. 

Prematurely introducing a new legal mechanism would not only be inconsistent with the principles of 
proportionality, legitimacy and good administration, and not justifiable for the following reasons: 

  The existing competition law framework is sufficient to address structural competition problems 
in many cases, especially if the Commission expedites enforcement action (e.g. through use of 
interim measures as we have suggested above and revises certain Guidelines and Notices (as 
explained above -see in particular the response to question 9). 
In particular, we believe the following revisions to Guidelines and Notices will not only enable 
more efficient and dynamic enforcement of competition, but will be beneficial for competition in 
the EU: 

 

o  The Relevant Markets Notice should be updated to encourage a more dynamic and 
forward-looking market assessment to keep up with the fast pace of digital markets. 
o  The Horizontal and Vertical Agreements Guidelines should be revised to allow for the 

consideration of theories of harm that arise from vertical and conglomerate foreclosure 
concerns in digital markets, especially given the prevalence of those sorts of concerns in 
the digital world, the similar approach to foreclosure adopted under both sets of 
concerns, and because of the development in thinking about such foreclosure concerns 
arising in recent merger practice both in the EU and elsewhere, as these types of 
concerns pose the greatest threat to competition-related barriers for European firms 
wishing to enter the digital space where firms from other jurisdictions (predominantly 
the US) are already present.  

o  The Article 102 Enforcement Priorities Guidelines should be updated to specifically 
address the impact of certain types of digital market business models, identify 
competition problems associated with the exploitation of such business models, and 
explain further the rationale behind potential theories of harm that might apply in 
markets with digital gatekeepers.  

o  The Horizontal Merger Guidelines (in particular on innovation effects) and Non-

Horizontal Merger Guidelines (in particular on conglomerate effects)   
  The Commission already has extensive powers to gather information about markets where it 
believes that it is not working as well as it should in part due to competition problems in that 
market or sector, and to intervene where it is necessary to address irreparable harm to 
competition and/or consumers. In our view, many of the types of competition concerns that the 
Commission has raised through this consultation could be addressed through greater use of 
interim measures powers and sector inquiries, which might require relatively minor 
amendments to Regulation 1/2003 and which are unlikely to meet with much political 
opposition at the Member State level.  For example, sector inquiry powers could be strengthened 
to give the Commission the power to make recommendations to sector regulators and/or 
legislators. 

C2 General 

 
Vodafone Group response to the public consultation on a New Competition Tool 
Question 41 – additional information 

  A new legal mechanism that would allow the Commission to intervene and potentially to impose 

remedies without the need to satisfy the burden of proof required for a finding of 
infringement of competition law must be approached with great caution in any circumstances.  
It is questionable whether a new competition tool would be proportionate or legitimate, in 
particular as it would give the Commission significant powers to intervene in markets without 
going through the legislative process (e.g. without involving the European Parliament and the 
Council of Ministers) as it is the case today when the Commission wants to impose remedies after 
a sector enquiry. 

At a more fundamental level, one must question whether the legal basis upon which the Commission 
proposes to act can in fact be Article 103 TFEU, read in combination with Article 114 TFEU. Given that the 
proposed New Competition Tool is proposing to extend the Commission’s powers beyond those granted 
under Article 101 and 102, it is difficult to see how the proposed measures could be considered to “give 
effect to the principles” set forth in those Treaty Articles. By the same token, Article 114 TFEU is designed 
to achieve harmonization in approach as between Member State enforcement, which is also clearly not 
the policy basis which is driving the new proposed measures.  

Notwithstanding the above, should the Commission ultimately decide to introduce a New Competition 
Tool, Vodafone’s view is that: 

  With regard to the question of whether it should be dominance-based or market-structure based, 
it should apply to different related markets in which a gatekeeper platform is active and 
which can, due to the structural features of the markets, leverage and extend their market power 
across different relevant markets (not necessarily the individual market where that gatekeeper 
has market power).  See the response to question 18.8 above for our proposed definition of 
gatekeeper. 
Its scope should be limited to digital markets that have tipped, or are on the verge of tipping, 
towards dominance by a single gatekeeper firm (defined by reference to the criteria set out in 
response to question 18.8 and in our separate DSA consultation response) resulting in a 
structural lack of, or identifiable adverse effects on, competition.  Vodafone’s experience does 
not suggest that it needs to deal with complex oligopoly issues, as explained above, 
Vodafone’s experiences do not suggest that there are any identifiable candidates beyond digital 
markets that would justify such an intervention.   

 

  Where the Commission identifies a structural competition problem in a market subject to 

existing regulation, intervention through sector-specific regulation and/or Articles 101/102 
should be prioritised and the New Competition Tool should only be used where these tools are 
insufficient or not capable of addressing the particular problem at hand. This is necessary to 
avoid inconsistency, duplication and a “double jeopardy” situation.  

  The New Competition Tool must be subject to various checks and balances in terms of its 
scope/threshold, process, remedies and appeal rights – see our response to questions 29, 30 
and in Section E below. Currently, the UK regime from which we understand the proposed New 
Competition Tool takes inspiration has a series of essential procedural checks and balances 
which are not currently available under the EU competition law regime.  

 

  The Commission should only be able to intervene in markets pursuant to an investigation under 
the new competition tool if it can show adverse effects on competition to a sufficiently high level 
of standard of proof. 
Finally, to the extent that a New Competition Tool equips the Commission with the power to 
impose remedies, these should be limited non-binding remedies to companies, 
recommendations/proposals to sector-specific regulators and/or legislative 
recommendations. We do not believe the Commission should be able to impose binding 
remedies on companies in circumstances where it is not first required to establish an 
infringement of Article 101 or 102. See our response to question 30. As suggested above, 

C2 General 

 
Vodafone Group response to the public consultation on a New Competition Tool 
Question 41 – additional information 

however, we consider that a more proportionate way to achieve this could be through an 
extension of the Commission’s existing powers for sector inquiries under Regulation 1/2003 to 
enable it to make recommendations and proposals for regulatory and legislative reform.  

C2 General 

 
 
