Ref. Ares(2020)4722432 - 09/09/2020

EMMA-ENPA comments on 
The inception impact assessment and the public consultation on a 
New Competition Tool 

(08.09.2020) 

For  years,  magazine  and  newspaper  publishers  have  been  exposed  to 

I. 
increasing competitive pressure from market-dominant platform companies. 

As mega-platforms, by means of their gatekeeper position, decide if and how media 
offerings or commercial services have access to consumers through their  platforms, 
they decide which media offering or service has a chance on the respective reader and 
advertising markets. 

Press publishers are particularly affected by the ever-increasing market power of these 
mega-platforms.  In  fact,  these platforms do not  limit  themselves  to  their  (monopoly) 
intermediary  role.  They  constantly  broaden  the  scope  of  their  activities  by  invading 
adjacent niche markets – which allows them to collect further data and information to 
be fed back into the primary (monopoly) intermediary market. In many cases they also 
enter  into  unfair  competition  with  press  publishers,  particularly  on  downstream 
markets.  Routinely,  such  mega-platforms  commercially  offer,  supply  and  provide 
access to content for which they did not bear any of the production costs or original 
investment  and  use  it  to  substitute  content  producers  and  distributors,  while  at  the 
same time securing an increasing share of digital advertising budgets. 

The  concerning  developments  outlined  above  are  the  reason  why  already  in  2009, 
German  press  publishers'  associations  filed  a  complaint  against  the  abuse  of  the 
internet  search  monopoly  -  which  has  only  continued  to  grow  since  then.  With  the 
European Commission's Decision in the case AT.39740 - Google Search (Shopping) 
dated 27 June 2017, for the first time, a digital platform monopolist was prohibited from 
giving preference to its own offerings over offerings from competitors on its monopoly 
platform. 

While the  European  Commission's  decision  in  the Google  Shopping  case has  been 
seminal, it has also further highlighted the limitations of the current legal regime:  

• 

It took almost eight years from the first complaints to the Prohibition Decision; 

                                                                                                                             
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
•  The outcome verdict is not yet final, as an application for annulment is pending 

at the General Court;  

•  The Compliance Mechanism was designed by the infringing party, Google, and 
is unanimously seen as failing to reinstate equal treatment between its own and 
rival comparison-shopping services in the various markets1;  

•  The decision is strictly limited to the infringement in “comparison-shopping”; and 
•  Therefore,  its  legal  consequences  are  strictly  limited  to  the  comparison-
shopping market and not directly applicable to other markets; not least since the 
European Commission emphasised a necessary case-by-case approach; 

•  The many complaints from other verticals over the years are still unaddressed 

(e.g. jobs, hotel, travel, local, images). 

This case also illustrates the need for comprehensive improvements to the legal and 
administrative instruments for ensuring fair competition on dominant platforms, if we 
want to maintain economic (and editorial) competition in Europe. The Commission's 
prohibition  of  self-preferencing  against  the  search  monopoly  is  an  important  and 
possibly  historic  step  in  adapting  the  general  prohibition  of  abusive  practices  to  the 
realities of the platform economy in a networked world. 

However,  the  decision  alone  is  not  yet  sufficient.  It  is  not  yet  legally  binding,  its 
implementation  is  substantively  deficient,  and  its  limitation  to  the  "comparison-
shopping" market as well as its limited legal consequences are far from sufficient to 
ensure fair competition between those companies that rely on neutral search. 

Given the current enforcement deficits vis-à-vis the large gatekeeper mega-platforms, 
it must be possible to sanction the delay of legal proceedings adequately. Therefore, 
deterring sanctions should be applied when regulating these market players. 

II.  We  therefore  welcome  the  European  Commission's  intention  to  take 
action against the specific market power of gatekeeper platforms and to restore 
and ensure non-discriminatory and fair competition in the internal market.  

To this end, the European Commission has announced an instrument for the ex-ante 
regulation of very large online platforms acting as gatekeepers ("ex ante regulation") 
as  part  of  the  Digital  Services  Act.  In  addition,  a  new  supplementary  instrument  to 

1 Compare Storåkers, CEO of PriceRunner, “No one in the industry thinks that these remedies have made a 
difference.”, quoted in Politico's Pro Morning Tech, 25 August 2020. 

                                                                                                                             
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
improve  the  enforcement  of  competition  law  ("New  Competition  Tool")  will  aim  to 
address  structural  competition  problems,  which  prevent  markets  from  functioning 
properly. 

The  European  Commission's  intention  to  ensure  that  competition  policy  and 
competition rules are up-to-date is in principle to be welcomed for the reasons outlined 
above.  However,  the  specific  design  of  an  additional  instrument  to  improve  the 
enforcement  of  competition  law  in  detail  will  be  crucial  in  order  to  ensure  the 
effectiveness of the new measures. In order to address the key challenges of restoring 
and  ensuring  fair  competition  in  digital  markets  characterised  by  large  gate-keeper 
platforms, and in order not to go beyond the set target, it may be appropriate to limit 
the  scope  of  the  new  measures  to  the  problematic  digital  platform  markets.  In  any 
event,  a  wide  application  of  the  envisaged  measures,  which  would  pose  significant 
risks to those markets that are not characterised by unequal competition and the same 
enforcement problems, should be avoided. It goes without saying that it is difficult to 
assess the content of such measures before their scope and conditions for intervention 
are further specified. 

In order to restore and secure fair competition in the (digital) internal market in the long 
term,  it  must  be  ensured  that  both  initiatives,  the  ex  ante  regulation  and  the  New 
Competition  Tool,  do  not  overlap  or  undermine  each  other.  Accordingly,  the  New 
Competition Tool cannot be an alternative to the necessary ex ante regulation of digital 
gatekeeper mega-platforms. We therefore particularly welcome the clarification in the 
inception impact assessment that the New Competition Tool should be complementary 
to the ex ante regulation. For this reason, we would in principle consider it appropriate 
to restrict the planned measure’s scope of application to the area of the digital markets, 
which  are  characterised  by  the  gatekeeper  mega-platforms,  in  order  to  prevent  an 
overreaching  scope.  The  public  consultations  and  impact  assessments  on  both 
initiatives should inter alia ensure that consistency is ensured and overlap between the 
two initiatives is avoided. 

EMMA-ENPA have taken note of the four regulatory options presented in the European 
Commission’s  inception  impact  assessment.  Options  3  or  4  of  the  inception  impact 
assessment would not require any market dominance, nor an abuse for intervention. 
Options 1 and 2, on the other hand, would require a finding of market dominance with 
the  companies  concerned,  but  would  not  require  the  existence  of  an  abuse  under 
Article 102 TFEU. In both cases, the conditions for intervention would be significantly 
reduced  compared  to  the  standard  of  general  competition  law.  However,  a 
proportionate design of the envisaged additional rules appears to be essential in order 

                                                                                                                             
 
 
 
to  avoid  unwanted  negative  effects  on  other  competitive  markets.  We  therefore 
consider  that  the  New  Competition  Tool  should  complement  ex  ante  regulation  of 
gatekeeper platforms and, in any case, should only be applied in cases where sector-
specific regulation such as ex ante regulation is not applicable. This would require that 
the New Competition Tool be limited to the very area of gatekeeper mega-platforms. 

Against this background, we must express concerns about all the options presented in 
the  inception  impact  assessment.  As  no  concrete  conditions  for  intervention  or 
constitutive elements of a "structural competition problems" are known for options 3 
and  4,  we  consider  these  approaches  to  be  too  broad  at  this  stage.  To  avoid  low 
hurdles for intervention by the competition authority, it is essential that the criteria for 
intervention,  in  particular for "structural competition  problems",  be  specified  in more 
detail. Taken individually, all the elements of definition present a risk of intervention in 
markets which are not characterised by the same challenges as the platform markets, 
characterised by digital gatekeeper platforms. 

*** 

                                                                                                                             
 
 
 
