Ref. Ares(2020)4723185 - 09/09/2020

Once we recognize that economies of scale and scope on the supply and demand side of the 
market create efficiencies, we must accept the proposition that there will be small numbers of 
firms supplying the functionalities that consumers want because their costs and prices will be 
lower. This is an infrastructure problem that has existed since the birth of capitalism. The answer 
has always been to design a structure that provides the shared infrastructure and makes it 
available to all users on fair, reasonable, and nondiscriminatory (FRAND) terms. There have 
been a variety of solutions, from regulated, private, franchise provision (common carriers, 
turnpike trusts) to state ownership.  Unregulated private provision has been a disaster for well 
over a century because the economic interests of the private actors conflict with the public 
good.  The question is not whether to regulate the behavior, but how.   

Regulated competition is the answer, where the goal is to promote competition in decentralized 
capitalist markets along two dimensions—the core infrastructure market and markets that rely on 
such infrastructure—both of which require constraints on market power, which is “inefficient.” 
Inefficiency can be measured by prices and profits above costs, diseconomies of scale and scope, 
or artificial barriers to entry.  Thus, along the first dimension, because we do not know the 
precise limits of the economies of scale and scope, we hold out the hope that there can be 
competition for the core infrastructure services.  Along the second dimension, we are much more 
confident that there can be competition for the complements that ride on the 
infrastructure.  Anticompetitive behavior that limits potential competition along either dimension 
must be regulated and eliminated or diminished.  

Sometimes, we break the infrastructure into pieces, either horizontally (considering economies of 
scale) or vertically (considering economies of scope).  However, that is not always the best 
answer.  Sometimes it is better to ensure FRAND access to the infrastructure, which, above 
all,  addresses the problem for the competition from complements, but which can also lower the 
barriers to entry for head-to-head competition for the provision of infrastructure (i.e., competitors 
combine FRAND access to parts of the infrastructure with other parts that they self-supply). 
The answer is complicated but so too is the digital economy.  Anticompetitive conduct is 
generally easy to define, but may be difficult to prove.  Clearly identifiable complements that 
should not have been integrated with the infrastructure may be easy to see, but identifying 
whether the right solution is divestiture or structural separation is more 
challenging.  Encouraging the entry of competitive supply of complements is always the right 
thing to do, but response to the removal of entry barriers may be too slow without action against 
vertical integration.        

The high degree of concentration among big data platforms is reinforced by three other factors 
that create a “tight oligopoly on steroids,” which the commission highlights in its discussion of 
tacit collusion. High concentration is reinforced by multi-market contact, technological 
specialization, product segmentation, and geographic separation (for Big Broadband Networks) 
or must-have bundles (for Big Data Platforms). As shown in the following table, our working 
papers show that the tight oligopoly on steroids afflicts both the communications networks (Big 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Broadband Networks) and the information system (Big Data Platforms). The tight oligopoly on 
steroids results in the classic harms of lack of competition: denial of consumer choice, 
insufficient innovation, higher prices, and lower quality. 

THE TIGHT OLIGOPOLY ON STEROIDS: 
BIG BROADBAND NETWORKS AND BIG DATA PLATFORMS 

Tight Oligopoly on 
Steroids 
Characteristic 

High concentration 
& multi-market 
contact 

Big Broadband Networks 

Big Data Platforms 

Franchise, economies of scale 
Telco Basic Data Service (BDS), 
Wireless Cable Multichannel Video 
Programming Distributor (MVPD) , 
Broadband Internet Access Service 
(BIAS) 

Economies of scale & scope, 
zero marginal cost, winner-take-
most 
Google Search, Facebook 
connectivity, Amazon 
distribution 

Technological 
Specialization 

Point-to-point (landline) 
Cell Networks 
Star Video 

Google algorithms and network 
value, Facebook network value, 
Amazon distribution efficiency 

Product 
Segmentation 

Voice, wireless 
Video, BIAS  

Search, Social media, 
distribution 

Unique Product 
Traits 

Geographic Separation 
Local network 
Franchise origin  

All: “must have” content 
protected by lock-in supply-side 
foreclosure and demand-side 
bundling and behavioral 
manipulation 

Gatekeeper control of chokepoints, reinforced by steroids, gives the small number of firms that 
dominate the digital communications sector immense market power. They have demonstrated 
time and again that they have the willingness and ability to abuse that market power. Specific 
areas where policy can move forward in spite of the complexity include: 

•  Concentration: Public policy must not only deal with the high level of concentration, it 

must also address the steroids to restore competition for Big Data Platforms.   

•  Excessive horizontal or vertical concentration should be prevented 
•  Anticompetitive bundling: Take action to avoid anticompetitive bundling, banning unfair 

rates terms and conditions, requiring open access to APIs. 

•  While collusion is clearly illegal, tacit collusion and parallel exclusion should also be 

prevented. 

•  Exclusionary practices:  should be banned, including predation (with a new standard for 
anticompetitive pricing), foreclosure, denial of access to customers, and self-dealing  

•  Transparency: Fair Information Practices 

 
 
 
 
•  Privacy: Effective consumer choice. One of the great challenges is access to data and the 
solution cannot be to just force data to be shared. There must be a stronger regime for 
consumer sovereignty over data.    

While some of these policies should apply to all firms in the market and may be addressed by 
general policies – e.g., a structure of supply side transparency and demand side consumer choice 
(sovereignty) – others should focus on dominant firms. A “traditional” measure of dominance 
should be used.  A tight oligopoly exists where the top four firms have a 60% (or more) market 
share, and all firms that could constitute this market share should be well regulated. While action 
against anticompetitive structures and conduct should be taken against firms who constitute the 
tight oligopoly, scrutiny should not stop there. The empirical evidence we have reviewed shows 
that “four is few, six may be enough, and ten are many.”  Scrutiny of higher numbers of firms 
(4–10) should be subject to complaint and might shift the burden to complaining firms. 

While dual jurisdiction (antitrust and regulation) has been essential to oversight over the 
communications sector, and should remain so, it is important to have clear regulatory 
responsibility vested in specific agencies (we prefer a new digital regulatory agency). Because of 
the large benefits, the approach should be to achieve the desired pro-competitive, pro-consumer 
outcomes with the least amount of intervention necessary.   

Subject to agency expertise and practice, no remedies should be taken off the table, and the threat 
of extreme action is a useful prod to corrective action. However, no remedies should be 
mandated before careful consideration has been given to the costs and benefits of more extreme 
actions. In order to accomplish its goals with the least intervention necessary, the regulatory 
agency must have full investigative authority, power and resources and it must be subject to 
deadlines to avoid foot dragging by firms under investigation.  

 
 
 
 
 
