Ref. Ares(2020)4664683 - 08/09/2020

Unbundling of hosting and content moderation: a draft proposal to help fix competition and
freedom of expression challenges in social media markets

September 2020

The problem

Social   media   platforms   have   revolutionised   the   way   people   access   and   share   content.  They   have   acted   as
tremendous enablers for individuals’ right to freedom of expression and information. However, they have also
built users’ profiles through the accumulation of traces of online navigation and drawn them in with targeted
advertising. They have accelerated the dissemination of various kinds of problematic content such as some forms
of ‘hate speech’ and ‘disinformation’.

In addition, the major social media platforms act as gatekeepers in the social media markets.  They control
economic  actors’ access  to  the  users  and  are  able   to  raise  barriers   to  entry   for  competitors.  As  such,  they
determine the competition dynamics in the market and in the aftermarkets. On the one hand, economic actors
that want access to the users have to accept the conditions imposed by the gatekeepers; on the other hand,
gatekeepers deprive users of viable alternatives.

ARTICLE 19 is particularly concerned by the fact that social media gatekeepers act not only as “economic”
gatekeepers, but also as “human rights” gatekeepers, with particular impact on the right freedom of expression
and information, and the right to privacy. This manifests itself in two ways. First is the companies' ability to
dictate standard terms of service (ToS) for their users and to implement content moderation policies that are
critical in terms of freedom of expression standards. Second, it also raises concerns where governments are able
to pressure these gatekeepers into changing their ToS or policies in way which is not compliant with human
rights.

Moreover, at a community level, social media platforms with high market power can exert decisive influence on
public debate, which raises issues in relation to diversity and pluralisms in the online environment. It is of
utmost importance that media freedom and media pluralism are guaranteed online as they are offline.

Our proposal

The proposal ARTICLE 19 puts forward has its roots in the assumption that high concentration in social media
markets1, coupled with consistent barriers to entry for competitors, plays a fundamental role in the structural
competition problems and freedom of expression challenges we need to address in those markets. Therefore, our
proposal aims to fix challenges with content curation by diminishing concentration of power in the market and
by lowering barriers to entry for alternative curation services.

Although hosting and curation activities are currently provided as a bundle by the vast majority of social media
platforms, this does not need to be the case, and it is not something irreversible. The bundle has a strategic
economic value, and it contributes to lock in users and to raise barriers to entry to the market for potential

1  The high level of concentration in digital platforms markets has been identified by, among others, by the CMA Study as well as by
Furman review. See:  CMA, Online Platforms and Digital Advertising,  Market Study Final Report, (2020);  Furman et al.,  Unlocking
Digital Competition (2019).

competitors. In other words, by offering both services together, dominant social media platforms manage to
protect themselves from competitive pressure and deprive users from alternatives; they are able to hold their
gatekeeping position safely.

This scenario is undesirable from a number of perspectives, and has an impact on competition, innovation,
individuals' rights and, to a certain extent, also broader public objectives such as media plurality and diversity.
As mentioned earlier, it also results in a number of market failures such as excessive concentration in the market,
barriers to entry, and other externalities created by the dominant platforms' behaviors that are not internalised
and thus fall on individual users and on society, who pay the costs.

ARTICLE 19 calls for an ex ante remedy to address this situation. This would oblige social media platforms with
significant market power to unbundle hosting and content curation activities, and allow third parties to offer
content curation to the platforms’ users. As a way of example, what we envisage is that a user that creates or has
a profile on Facebook would be asked by the platform whether they want the content  curation  service to be
provided by Facebook itself, or by other players to be freely selected. The option to stay with the dominant
platform   should   be   presented   as   opt-in,   rather   than   opt-out.   We   believe   that   opt   in  default   is   more   pro-
competitive and reduces switching costs (and therefore also  avoid that platforms undermine the effects of the
unbundling by making the switching hard for users and by nudging them towards a locked-in situation).

Designing the unbundled access to content curation

ARTICLE 19 calls for an asymmetric remedy. We believe that such remedy should be imposed on platforms that
have a gatekeeping position or a position of market strength that, irrespective of whether it can be defined as
dominance under competition rules,  it  allows   the  platform  to  raise  barriers  to entry,  determine   competition
dynamics in the market, and deprive users of viable alternatives.

We recommend a form of functional separation, not a structural one. In addition, the platform that provides the
hosting should remain free to offer content curation too. What changes is that the platform should keep the two
services   separate   and   provide   competitors   the   possibility   to  offer  the  curation  service   on   its  platform;  the
platform must also allow users to freely choose among service providers.

The unbundling remedy should be designed to address the contractual layer (contractual agreements between the
platforms with significant market power and the alternative players that provide content curation services to the
platforms' users) and the technical layer (how to make this technically possible while ensuring data protection,
consumer protection and security).

For   the   contractual   layer,   we   suggest   that   platforms   provide   access   to   competitors   based   on   fair,

reasonable, transparent and non-discriminatory grounds. We also suggest platforms should not be allowed to
change the access conditions unilaterally in a way that nullifies competitors’ efforts and investments.

 For the technical layer, we believe the more efficient solution to be that platforms should open a curation
Application Programming Interface (API) to potential competitors. As such, the efficacy of the unbundling
remedy   is   based   on   the  adoption   of   interoperability   solutions,   whose  details   should   be   defined   by   the
regulator, guided by independent experts with the relevant knowledge and in cooperation with the platform
in   order   to   deal   with   the   substantial   information   asymmetries   in   the   market.   Indeed,   as   explained   by
distinguished  academic experts,  various  types  of   interoperability  exist, and  each of  them   could best   fit
different situations and needs2.

2 See, in particular: Ian Brown, Interoperability as a tool for competition regulation, preprint of 31 July 2020; Vittorio Bertola (2020), A
Technical and Policy Analysis of Interoperable Internet Messaging.

What the unbundling could achieve

ARTICLE 19 suggests that unbundling is  a  highly pro-competition  remedy:  it opens the market for content
curation and relies on competition among players to deliver more choices and better-quality services to users.
Therefore, the unbundling is also capable of addressing the market failures mentioned above. Furthermore, the
remedy we suggest is not a novelty in the history of economic regulation; on the contrary, it has been often used
in network industries, and especially in the telecom sector, in order to enhance competition and stimulate market
entry.

Moreover, the unbundling is less invasive or paternalistic than other instruments to address challenges related to
content curation, such as imposing specific curation policies or establishing ‘must carry’ obligations. It interferes
only limitedly on  digital platforms' freedom of economic activities and  it empowers users to make their own
choices, rather than imposing strict standards on the market.

Our Recommendations:

We call the European Commission to impose the unbundling of hosting and content curation activities on social
media platforms, and in particular:

 We suggest  an asymmetric obligation, to  be imposed  on social  media platforms  with  a gatekeeping
position or a position of market strength;
 The unbundling should  be coupled  with  the   obligation  to  provide   access  based  on  fair,  reasonable,
transparent and non-discriminatory grounds, and with the necessary interoperability requirements;
 The remedy should allow users to freely select the content curation provider of their choice.

