7 September 2020 

The EU Digital Services Act  
ITI Views on the on the DSA Questionnaire on the “New 
Competition Tool”   

 1. Introduction 

The Information Technology Industry Council (ITI) appreciates the opportunity to provide comments to 
the European Commission on the New Competition Tool. While doing that, we will make  reference to 
relevant aspects presented in the separate Inception Impact Assessment on the New Competition Tool 
that  the  European  Commission  published  when  launching  the  DSA  consultation.  ITI  is  also  submitting 
comments separately to the parallel questionnaire on the broader DSA issues and the gatekeeper aspects.  

As the global voice of the tech industry, ITI strongly supports free and undistorted competition as key to 
promoting innovation and consumer welfare. Together with our member companies, that include leading 
innovation players with worldwide value chains and active through all the segments of the technology 
sector, we are committed to addressing challenges potentially arising from digitalisation globally and in 
the EU.  

ITI is resolutely in favour of this reflection process as part of a broader policy debate about the need for 
changes  to  the  current  competition  law  framework  in  order  to  allow  interventions  that  preserve 
competitive markets. We strongly believe that proportionate instruments that ensure a consistent policy 
approach and fair competition should be considered wherever necessary.  

With  this  goal  in  mind,  grasping  differences  in  business  models  and  user  interaction  across  digital 
platforms is key to gauging potential non-competitive conduct and properly addressing any challenges. As 
the notion of platform refers to very different business models, policymakers should consider the role 
that specific companies play in the markets they operate in, the value they create, their relationship to 
customers and competitors, and the possible alternatives. The goal should be to ensure market access for 
innovative challengers, ensure consumer welfare and economic efficiency, and focus on resolving proven 
market failures.  

ITI  believes  that  any  remedies  would  have  to  focus  on  the  specific  situation,  and  be  preceded  by  a 
consideration  of  whether  other,  less  radical  alternative  approaches  would  be  effective.  It  would  be 
difficult to enact a one-size-fits-all approach across all types of situations. Policymakers should consider 
how to ensure that new market entrants are able to succeed, while not imposing rigid rules that disrupt 
the consumer experience or value that they receive from a platform. 

The  following  sections  provide  more  in-depth  comments  that  mirror  the  different  sections  of  the 
Commission’s  survey  on  the  topic.  We  hope  that  our  contribution  below  will  be  a  useful  resource  for 
policymakers, and we look forward to continuing to engage on this topic in the future. 

1 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2. Structural Competition Problems and Problem Definition (Q. 6)  

With regard to Question no. 6, the Commission links the need for a New Competition Tool (“NCT”) to the 
existence of structural competition problems that cannot be tackled under the EU competition rules while 
resulting in inefficient market outcomes. We recommend that the Commission provides more evidence 
in  support  of  this  statement,  also  considering  that  while  competition  challenges  may  exist,  further 
consideration should be given to the fact that by reducing entry barriers and making it easier for small 
suppliers to reach new customers, innovative technologies and businesses benefit consumers by offering 
new services and increasing competition and economic efficiencies in innumerable fields. By doing so, 
they offer major opportunities to start-ups and SMEs, who can grow more and faster than they would 
otherwise do, underpinning future European prosperity.  

We would welcome a deeper reflection by the Commission on the problem definition and market analysis 
to support the introduction of new measures (such as those described in the IIA). Among other aspects, 
deeper  analysis  of  network  effects  is  needed  –  markets  are  not  necessarily  less  competitive  or  less 
innovative, as there are several medium and smaller platforms that continue to help customers reach a 
wide range of goods and services. This is particularly relevant as regards the statement in the IIA on the 
NCT that intervention at national level would not be effective, as it is not infrequent that the competitive 
balance varies significantly in some Member States’ markets where local platforms play a very strong role.  

Competitive dynamics across platforms offering different core services to the same customers should also 
be assessed. Grasping differences in business models and user interaction across digital platforms is key 
to  gauging  potential  non-competitive  conduct  and  properly  addressing  any  challenges.  Enforcement 
should focus on a company’s conduct and not on structural issues, like the amount of data a company 
holds, or its size. Nevertheless, all of the options under consideration in the IIA would allow the European 
Commission  to  impose  behavioural  or  structural  remedies  even  in  absence  of  any  infringement.  In 
addition, the IIA does not provide any indication as to what kind of behavioural or structural remedies 
would be deemed appropriate for application to a business that has not been infringing any rules.   

As a  minimum, if a new tool were to be introduced, it should be subject to the highest threshold of burden 
of proof,  demonstrating that any remedy is underpinned by robust economic analysis. Competition policy 
enforcement  should  focus  in  particular  on  consumer  welfare,  not  on  protecting  competitors.  For 
example, artificially constraining the size of a company or network may appear to increase competition, 
but it could also reduce consumer welfare. Policymakers should consider how to ensure that new market 
entrants are able to succeed, ensuring markets remain open to innovative challengers, while not imposing 
rigid rules that disrupt the consumer experience or value that they receive from a business, therefore 
keeping consumer welfare and economic efficiency as final objectives.  

In addition, platforms play a beneficial role as engines of the digital marketplace, not least by facilitating 
information and communication and helping match offer and demand in the Digital Single Market and 
globally. Platforms make it easier for consumers to buy online, compare products and their prices, learn 
from other consumers’ experiences. In e-commerce, they are one of the main channels for cross-border 
transactions, allowing SMEs to compete beyond their national market and grow more, or more rapidly, 
than they would without an online intermediary. Consumers greatly benefit from the resulting increase 
in competition, variety and offer. 

2 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3. Specific situations identified by the NCT Questionnaire  

3.1 Concentrated markets 

Most  discussion  of  antitrust  issues  and  platforms  seems  to  focus  on  large  companies.  While 
efficiencies  of  scale  and  network  effects  may  push  toward  concentration,  this  is  not  always  the 
necessary  outcome  and  careful  analysis  of  the  network  effects  as  applied  to  different  markets  is 
needed – they will not necessarily be less competitive or less innovative. Furthermore, a concentrated 
market  does  not  in  itself  present  a  structural  competition  problem  as  long  as  competition  among  the 
existing players results in competitive prices, quality, choice, and innovative products and services. Market 
definitions  should  better  reflect  the  competitive  dynamics  in  the  sectors  (for  example  competition 
between  online  and  offline  operators  in  a  certain  market).  Also,  these  markets  are  increasingly 
competitive and innovative, as medium and smaller Internet platforms continue to play important roles 
in helping match suppliers and customers for a wide range of goods and services. In addition, the presence 
of large platforms can increase competition by making it easier for users to reach a vast range of suppliers 
and find the best offers. 

3.2 Vertical integration 

First, a high degree of vertical integration in itself does not represent a structural competition problem 
and might in some instances increase competition. The benefits of vertical integration are recognized in 
the Commission’s Guidelines on Non-Horizontal Mergers: the elimination of double-marginalization and 
better alignment of incentives as regards the development, production and marketing of new products 
and services. They can also be consumer welfare enhancing, by improving user experience and increase 
user safety.  

It is important to consider how gatekeeper definitions may apply to companies with multiple verticals. For 
example, a company may have a  dominant position in  one area, such as  social media, ecommerce, or 
music streaming, but also compete as a smaller player with large platforms that dominate other verticals. 
The Commission should focus on specific conduct and actions, rather than the size of one or more business 
units. Furthermore, the variegated nature of online platforms and the incentives driving specific decisions 
by platforms must be taken into account when assessing conduct. An incentive to protect the user against 
fraud, data violations or security threats might be to the immediate detriment of specific business users, 
while sustaining consumer trust to the benefit of all users. 

3.3 Customer Switching 

Consideration of issues related to switching, access to data and portability  (also addressed in Q. 18.9) 
would  necessarily  have  to  focus  on  the  specific  platform  and  data  concerned,  and  the  available 
alternatives. It would be difficult to enact a one-size-fits-all approach to these issues across all types of 
platforms. Relatedly, bundling between operating systems and applications could on the one hand limit 
choice, while on the other benefit consumers, for instance by offering mobile devices working right out 
of the box.  

3.4 Network effects 

In some cases, a platform’s value to each individual user grows with the number of other users, and its 
size brings considerable benefits.  However, network effects may be observed even when no dominant 
position exists, potentially resulting in user lock-in or limiting new entrants on the market.  

3 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
One the one hand, proposals to artificially constrain the size of networks might increase competition while 
reducing consumer welfare. Moreover, users may even benefit from concentration, as it enables them to 
rely  on  one  (or  few)  platform(s)  for  each  specific  service  or  activity,  be  it  shopping,  social  interaction, 
transportation or accommodation among others. This should not necessarily lead to competition concerns 
– when a new, more innovative and competitive alternative will come along, it will supplant the current 
incumbent  platforms  as  users  will  migrate  towards  it  for  either  one  or  all  aspects  of  a  given  service. 
Furthermore, network effects can go both ways – they can reinforce a company’s market position but also 
weaken it – if users no longer trust the platform on one side, the other side will also look elsewhere. 

On the other hand, network  effects may however disincentivise switching between platforms, thereby 
possibly diminishing choice and effective competition (see also Q. 18.9). This could be reinforced in some 
cases  by  lack  of  interoperability.  In  this  context,  better  understanding  how  certain  company  practices 
impact a specific market and correcting potential imbalances and failures may be useful, as long as such 
tools and rules are carefully assessed in order not to negatively impact consumer choice, innovation, and 
rapidly evolving markets and business models.  

These effects should be considered, but only in combination with other indicators like market behaviour 
and a company’s conduct. 

3.5 Data dependency 

This issue is also referred to in Q. 6. Big data generates substantial innovations and efficiency gains, many 
of which are passed on to consumers, who are offered new products and services often free of charge. In 
addition, controlling large datasets does not necessarily lead to market power, as most digital markets are 
characterised by vigorous dynamic competition. As with many other assets, data could potentially be used 
in anticompetitive ways: large network effects can potentially diminish consumer choice and effective 
competition. This could be reinforced by lack of interoperability and the possibility to exert filtering power, 
which grows with size. ITI believes that competition policy can currently deal with these situations, and 
the existing European legal framework gives competition and data protection regulators abundant tools 
to  protect  markets  and  consumers  when  needed.  At  the  same  time,  intervention  should  focus  on  a 
company’s conduct and not on structural issues as such, like the size of a company or the amount of data 
it  holds  or  collects.  In  most  cases  the  acquisition  and  use  of  data  does  not  represent  a  threat  to 
competition – and large amounts of data, including personal information, are increasingly a vital input for 
some of the economy’s most important innovations, in healthcare, safety, transport and environmental 
protection just to name a few. In this context, independent data analysis solutions play an important role 
in helping provide transparency to the market.  

3.6 Extension in related markets 

As regards the issue of extension in related markets (referred to in Qs. 7A, 8) platforms can also extend 
into other markets with their own applications that compete with other providers, sometimes leveraging 
their pre-existing position from one market to another. While this should be closely monitored, it could 
have pro-competitive effects: by reducing entry barriers and making it easier for small suppliers to reach 
new  customers,  platforms  increase  competitive  pressure  on  traditional  industries  like  transport, 
communications,  or  tourism,  to  the  benefit  of  consumers.  Regulators  should  in  these  cases  focus  on 
consumer welfare, not on protecting competitors. Platforms that provide more choice and lower prices 
usually lead to some disruption on more traditional competitors in the market. Any potential intervention 

4 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
should take into account the specific characteristics of  the market and respond only to  uncompetitive 
behaviour by platform or non-platform actors equally.  

The survey also asks whether large amount of data have an anti-competitive role when a company with 
market power in a core market may apply repeated strategies to extend its market position to related 
markets (question 8). We believe that value of data depends on its commercial use and generally does 
not  raise  special  antitrust-related  concerns,  as  in  itself  it  neither constitutes  a  barrier  to  entry,  nor  by 
default grants a competitive advantage in the market. In fact, holding a certain amount of data can often 
lead to a competitive advantage if a business is also able to analyse and extract value from it, which is 
often passed on to consumers through new applications. Moreover, the amount of data is infinite, and 
data is non-rivalrous in that it can be simultaneously collected and use by multiple firms, and consumers 
can  use  or  share  their  data  multiple  times.  When  acting  as  an  antitrust  enforcer,  we  recommend  the 
Commission  therefore  assess  data  under  the  existing  competition  framework  as  any  other  asset  that 
companies compete with in the market.  

3.7 Pricing algorithms 

Question 14 refers to pricing algorithms, as automated tools that allow very frequent changes to prices 
and other terms taking into account all or most competing offers on the market.  Big data and artificial 
intelligence  technologies  are  rapidly  changing  the  way  strategic  market  decisions  are  made.  An  issue 
which is often referred to is the potential for market distortion of pricing algorithms. The fact that pricing 
algorithms are used or not should not change an antitrust enforcement agency’s conclusion in relation to 
certain conduct. Still, increasing use of these algorithms raises enforcement questions as it might facilitate 
collusion, or make detection of collusive behaviour more difficult. However, concepts such as “machine-
to-machine” have not been established.  The use or misuse of pricing algorithms always requires human 
input and thus existing tools under Article 101 are sufficient. 

The uncertainty surrounding AI technologies and the applicable rules may lead to concerns among those 
businesses considering the use of pricing algorithms. This would not be a desirable outcome, since there 
do  not  seem  to  be  default  antitrust  concerns  that  would  justify  sacrificing  the  potential  economic 
efficiency brought about by AI. We therefore encourage the Commission to evaluate existing policy tools 
and use caution before taking measures that may inadvertently or unnecessarily decrease competition 
instead of fostering it.  

3.8 Tipping markets 

The section of the questionnaire addressing structural competition problems also addresses the issue of 
tipping markets in question 17, and the possible need to intervene “early” in tipping markets to preserve 
or  “improve”  competition.  In  parallel,  the  objectives  of  the  IIA  refer  to  the  importance  of  restoring 
undistorted competition. In both cases, the policy approach presented – and developed in the IIA’s policy 
options – seems to  address situations where competition has not been distorted yet, and would rather 
require  regulators  to  predict  the  future  development  of  a  market,  based  on  the  assumption  that 
competition law remedies aimed at addressing an illegal conduct that has actually taken place would not 
be sufficient.  

5 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4. Gatekeepers 

Question 18 and following address the issue of gatekeepers, which ITI is also addressing in our separate 
submission to the first DSA questionnaire on e-commerce issues and gatekeepers*. In our view, the nature 
of  a  platform  and  its  size  should  not  automatically  be  perceived  as  harmful,  particularly  given  the 
demonstrated  benefits  the  platform  economy  brings  to  all  users,  including  to  deliver  trust,  reach  and 
efficiencies.    We  therefore  encourage  the  Commission  to  consider  focusing  the  scope  and  test  for 
intervention on particular actions and conduct, rather than companies. The characteristics of a market, 
specific  activities  by  a  platform,  and  interactions  with  other  platforms  and  with  users  will  be  more 
indicative of a potential market failure than just the characteristics of a particular platform, such as market 
share, number of users, or number of services offered.  

In relation to question 19 on the potential need to intervene, we recognize the challenge in introducing 
new restrictions or limitations, as the Commission does not want to create unintended consequences that 
could needlessly hamper innovation, consumer experiences, or business growth. Carefully considering the 
impact  of  potential  limitations  is  crucial  in  order  to  prevent  any  regulatory  failure  from  overbroad 
instruments or poorly tailored requirements. Any potential limitation to behavior or business practices 
should be narrowly focused to achieve the intended goal.  

In addition, a company should not be singled out based exclusively on size (market share, number of users, 
amount of services…) or impact. It would be helpful to better clarify the potential consumer harm caused 
by certain platforms becoming or acting as “gatekeepers” and how this approach would help alleviate 
competitive concerns that cannot already be addressed by existing instruments. To the contrary, there is 
a risk of discouraging growth beyond a certain threshold due to the increased burden of compliance with 
additional legal obligations. 

5. Suitability and effectiveness of the existing framework of Articles 101 and 102 TFEU 

This issue is addressed by several questions in relation to various situations (e.g. Qs 9.2, 15.2, 17.2, 19.2, 
21.2).  Also,  All  of  the  options  in  the  IIA  would  constitute  a  major  shift  from  the  current  European 
Competition law setting based on the framework provided by articles 101 and 102 TFEU, which has served 
the European single market well for the past nearly 60+ years, during which it has undergone deep scrutiny 
by  the  European  Courts,  demonstrating  it  is  both  durable  and  sufficiently  flexible  to  address  new 
challenges.    

In  the  case  of  specific  concerns  is  referred  to  in  the  survey  -  like  tacit  collusion,  or  the  growing 
availability of algorithm-based technological solutions that may facilitate the monitoring of competitors’ 
conduct – we believe these could and should be addressed by more targeted measures. In any case, we 
fundamentally believe any remedy should seek to address specific unlawful conduct or a systemic problem 
in the market, not focus on the actors and the characteristics of a type of company. 

6. Potential Set-up of the Tool 

The following section of the survey addresses the potential need for a new competition tool (NCT) to deal 
with  structural  competition  problems  that  cannot  be  tackled  by  the  existing  EU  competition  law 
framework (question 24). The options for an NCT are further described in the IIA.  

6 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Among  others,  the  survey  mentions  the  concept  of  “early  intervention”  to  prevent  structural  risks  to 
competition, presumably in the future and particularly for tipping markets (for instance in question 25). 
ITI believes it is difficult to conceive how this type of intervention by a public enforcement authority, in 
absence of a well-identified infringement of existing laws, would not be too interventionist in a market 
economy.  

It is also our perspective that, if such a tool would ever be enacted, it should be strictly dominance-based 
(question 27). Provided that all of the options in the IIA are in our view unjustified given the potential 
application absent any infringement, options 3 and 4 appear to be particularly problematic as they would 
allow  the  Commission  to  apply  behavioural  and  structural  remedies  even  without  a  requirement  to 
demonstrate dominance – dominance and abuse should remain fundamental preconditions for antitrust 
intervention.  

As regards the scope (question 28), also based on the current level of development of thinking in the IIA, 
the  difference  between  horizontal  (options  1  and  3)  vs  limited  scope  does  not  seem  particularly 
meaningful, since even when the scope would be limited in principle, the tool could be applied to digital 
markets, as well as other markets identified by the Commission. This being said, it is our perspective that 
if such a tool would ever be enacted, it should be based on rigorous application across all sectors so that 
any potential benefits apply across various markets.   

The  need  for  remedies  should  be  evidence-based,  and  should  be  effective  and  proportionate.  Any 
remedies  should  be  objectively  justified  and  proportionate  (i.e.  requiring  the  minimum  action  that  is 
necessary to address the problem identified). The tool  should offer the possibility to submit voluntary 
commitments at an early stage, particularly given its non-punitive nature.  

Finally, particularly in light of the potential to impose far-reaching behavioural remedies on non-dominant 
firms,  any  potential  implementation  of  a  new  tool  should  contain  strong  procedural  safeguards 
guaranteeing enhanced due process and rights of defence, including a straightforward and predictable 
test to trigger an investigation  and possible  subsequent intervention, based on clear criteria,  with the 
enforcement authority carrying the burden of proof.   

Relation between the NCT and the Ex-ante Tool for Gatekeepers in the DSA (Q. 40) 

The Commission should take into account the overall proportionality of the parallel consideration of both 
an ex ante regulatory intervention about “gatekeepers” and the potential introduction of broad-ranging 
ex-post remedies, that are meant to address similar concerns. While in principle ITI would rather be in 
favour  of  a  targeted  approach,  addressing  specific,  individual  situations  that  are  negatively  affecting 
competition, we do not believe the current options  as described in the IIA  can provide an appropriate 
basis  for  that  approach.  We  stand  ready  to  work  with  the  Commission  to  better  scope  any  emerging 
challenge and identify the most appropriate way forward.  

* * * 

7 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
