Telefónica’s response to DG COMP’s consultation 
regarding a New Competition Tool  
September 8, 2020 

1.  Executive summary 

Telefonica  welcomes  this  opportunity  to  comment  on  DG  COMP’s  proposals  for  a  New 
Competition Tool (NCT).  In summary, our assessment of this IIA from DG COMP is as follows: 

• 

If there is a problem with antitrust tools being insufficient to address problematic digital 
platform markets, then the first approach must be to fix antitrust, rather than create a 
new  layer  of  market  supervision.    DG  COMP  has  not  clearly  identified  the  gaps  in 
competition law, nor why antitrust economic tools cannot be adapted to solve these 
issues.  We make some proposals in this regard; Telefonica believes that antitrust can 
be adapted to capture problematic digital platform markets. 

•  The evidence contained in the IIA does not support DG COMP’s assertion that there are 
more  general  market  concentration  problems  in  the  economy.    The  referenced 
economic papers, in particular from the OECD, contradict the narrative put forward in 
the IIA.  The Commission has not done enough to justify a horizontal tool that covers 
the whole economy, there simply isn’t the economic evidence of a problem. 

•  Telefonica believes that there are competition problems in digital platform markets, but 
we believe that an ex-ante framework is the better approach to deal with these digital 
platform  markets  –  as  happens  in  other  sectors  which  require  systematic  targeted 
intervention.    So  we  are  strongly  supporting  DG  CNECT’s  parallel  proposal  3b  as  an 
alternative to any NCT. 

•  The legal basis given in the IIA to justify the need of the NCT are  misconceived: the 
NCT takes the form of an “ex-ante” intervention, yet explicitly the need for an NCT is 
based  there  being  no  breach  of  antitrust  rules  under  the meaning of  Art.  101 &  102 
TFUE.  It follows that the NCT cannot be justified based on Art. 103 TFUE.  

•  The UK’s market investigation tool is seen as a model for the NCT, at least by DG COMP.  
The  CMA’s  MI  tool  has  a  number  of  important  checks  and  balances,  in  particular  in 
relation to the selection of markets for review and the separation of the investigation 
function  from  the  CMA  executive.    Telefonica  believes  that  a  limited  NCT  might 
generate wider support if the Commission is clearer on how the application of any 
new rules would be triggered and controlled. 

•  Similarly, clarity of scope will be important if the Commission is to develop its case for 
an  NCT.    Any  NCT  proposed  by  the  Commission  will  only  deal  with  Single  Market 
problems, rather than national markets.  Telefonica believes that any NCT should not 
add regulation to already economically regulated sectors, especially in light of the lack 
of evidence presented for a general weakening of competition.  Existing laws are more 
than enough for those already regulated ex-ante. 

1 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2.  The justification for a New Competition Tool (NCT) 

An NCT focussed on digital markets 

We agree with DG COMP, as highlighted in the IIA, that the current competition tools have been 
shown to be insufficient, ineffective and even slow to address anticompetitive conducts exerted 
by a few digital platforms.  

This should naturally raise two questions: 

(1)  Can  existing  tools  (specifically  antitrust  methods)  be  updated  such  that  they  can 

effectively address competition problems? and only if not;  

(2)  Should there be new rules that deal with these problems specifically? If so, should these 

rules: 

a.  Be an ex-ante framework: ie the proposals of DG CNECT launched in the parallel 

consultation1; or 

b.  A new competition tool? 

To answer these questions a thorough and rigorous economic analysis of the impact on social 
welfare would be required, something that is lacking at the moment. Absent this analysis, the 
Commission should opt for the least intrusive of the proposed measures. And if, as it seems, the 
welfare problem is confined to a certain set of businesses of well-known features, then the tool 
should be limited also to that scope. 

It appears to Telefonica that the launch of DG CNECT’s proposals has led DG COMP to miss out 
the  important  intermediate  steps of  reviewing  competition  law  in  general  and consulting on 
changes to existing tools to address any shortcomings as they relate to digital platforms. 

During the  term of this Commission, DG COMP must review  general competition  law and its 
effectiveness in order to adapt the current tools to the Digital Economy, as well as reviewing a 
number of elements of competition law that expire during this mandate. 

Specifically, the Commission enjoys wide-ranging powers that can be more systematically used 
in order to tackle competition problems in digital platform markets: 

i. 

Use the existing Article 17 sector-inquiry power to improve the regulatory framework 
or feed into regulatory initiatives: a further use of sector inquiries would help to solve 
(if any) likely structural market failures in traditional sectors, having DG COMP making 
suggestions to regulators with the “ex-ante remedies” power left to the discretion of 
the sector specific regulator; 

ii. 

Imposition of behavioural or structural remedies (Article 7 and recital 12) in an ex-post 
intervention; and 

iii. 

Further use of interim measures (Article 8), limited in time. 

1  https://ec.europa.eu/info/law/better-regulation/have-your-say/initiatives/12418-Digital-Services-Act-
package-ex-ante-regulatory-instrument-of-very-large-online-platforms-acting-as-gatekeepers  

2 

 
 
 
 
 
In  addition,  the  current  reviews  on  the  Horizontal  and  Vertical  Guidelines  and  the  Market 
Definition Notice should be clearly focused on the Digital Economy, in order to respond to the 
challenges and new types of agreements emerging from the digital sector; as well as to address 
how the presence of digital platforms should be taken into account defining a relevant product 
market.  

With regard to the expected Merger Control review, we believe there is a clear need for new 
thresholds such as the value of the transaction in order to catch under the scope of review the 
so-called “killer acquisitions”. 

If there are problems with antitrust methodologies that make it difficult to deal with competition 
problems in digital markets, then DG COMP should seek to improve and update the defective 
methods  –  rather than propose  an incremental layer of  market  regulation.    If your car stops 
working at the side of the road, you don’t immediately buy a new one.  You see if you can fix up 
your car and go on your way.  Telefonica has long argued that antitrust rules require updating – 
they do not need to be superseded by a New Competition Tool. 

Finally, an ex-ante framework is better suited to deal with sector specific market failures than a 
New Competition Tool.  In our response to DG CNECT’s parallel consultation, we show how its 
Option 3b – a full ex-ante regulatory framework, could be made tractable.  There is no need to 
duplicate supervision through a sector specific NCT as well. This is especially true given the lack 
of academic consensus and the principle of proportionality when establishing new rules. 

Indeed, we note that DG COMP wants to ensure that overlap with the proposals of DG CNECT is 
minimised, similarly it should also be seeking to remove any conflicts with general competition 
law and sector specific regulation for other industries.  This is best undertaken in the round, 
during the review of competition law, rather than as an adjunct to the proposals of DG CNECT.   

Justification for a new competition tool with a horizontal scope 

Turning to the justifications made by the Commission in the IIA for expanding the scope of an 
NCT beyond digital markets, to the whole economy, the argument runs as follows:  

• 

Increasing firm profitability is evidence of a lessening of competition; and  

•  oligopoly market structures allow tacit collusion, which would be enhanced with digital 

tools such as Artificial Intelligence.  

It is worth examining these claims in more detail to see if the evidence put forward by DG COMP 
is  sufficient  to  warrant  intervention,  which  we  do  below.    A  subsidiary  argument  is  also  put 
forward that: 

•  The  problems  in  digital  markets  will  affect  all  markets,  because  all  markets  will 
eventually become digital.  This claim is obviously not true, or at least presents a gross 
simplification  of  how  the  interfaces  between  digital  platforms  and  the  rest  of  the 
economy work.  Just because Uber uses a digital platform to compete with taxi firms, 
does  not  make  the  entire  taxi  or  personal  transportation  sector  “digital”.    It  is  the 
intermediation service of the platform of Uber that is “digital”, not the act of paying a 
taxi fare in exchange for transportation.   

3 

 
 
 
 
Are higher firm profits evidence of the need for a New Competition Tool? 

Firstly it is worth observing that there might be a number of reasons for higher firm profits: 

(1)  The  location  of  profit  taking  in  the  value  chain  might  be  changing  –  profits might  be 
being  extracted  in  different  parts of the  value  chain as other  parts  commoditise  and 
value is added elsewhere.  It is important to examine the profits of all firms, rather than 
a subset; and/or 

(2)  The next question to ask is whether “supernormal” profits are a transitory feature or 
not?    In  contestable  markets  with  freedom  of  entry  and  exit,  it  is  the  presence  of 
supernormal profits that encourages entry and innovation by rivals, which eats into the 
profit taking by the established firms, returning profitability back to the efficient level.  
The transitory existence of higher profits is an economic signal for more competition to 
take place, not a signal for regulation. 

It is only where markets are not contestable, there is limited or no entry and exit,  and where 
supernormal profits persist for a protracted period that, from an economic point of view, there 
might be a competition problem.  Digital markets are often said to exhibit such features, but it 
is the contestability that should be tackled in our view, not the profit margins which are just a 
symptom.  This is why Telefonica supports an ex-ante regime based on securing contestability, 
like Option 3b proposed by DG CNECT. 

Returning to the justification for a horizontal new competition tool, the Commission quotes its 
own  Single  Market  Performance  Report  20192  as  showing  that  there  is  “a  growing  body  of 
economic evidence in the EU  suggesting increasing  market  concentration  and increasing firm 
profitability levels” [our emphasis].  Firstly, Telefonica notes that the relevant passage from the 
report runs to just one page out of sixty-two.  On page 25 of the Staff Working Document, the 
Commission’s analysis of “signs of weakening competition” is as follows: 

“Following a period of relative stability, indicators of competition have deteriorated after 
the [2008 financial] crisis. These trends are less pronounced in Europe than in US but still 
clearly detectable […..] The observed patterns include industry-level concentration which 
according  to  OECD  data  climbed  over  the  past  20  years  in  both  the  US  and  Europe. 
Possible explanations include structural changes in the economy, in particular the rise of 
new  technologies  with more efficient  production methods,  as  well as  a weakening of 
competition.” [our emphasis] 

Firstly,  it  is  worth  pointing  out  that  industry-level  concentration  is  not  the  same  as  market 
concentration.  As the authors of the quoted OECD study say3: 

“Industry  concentration  is  related  to,  but  distinct  from,  the  concept  of  market 
concentration. Industry concentration measures the extent to which economic activity is 
concentrated within a small number of large companies or business groups within an 
industry.  Market  concentration,  instead,  describes  the  weight  of  leading  firms  in  a 
market for particular products or services that are close substitutes. Accordingly, market 
concentration  is  a  far  narrower  definition  than  what  is  typically  reflected  in  industry 
concentration  measures.  The  fact  that  a  large  share  of  industry  activity  is  due  to  a 

2 https://data.consilium.europa.eu/doc/document/ST-15321-2019-ADD-1/en/pdf  
3 Industry Concentration in Europe and North America, Bajgar et al, January 2019 (OECD), paragraph 4. 

4 

 
 
 
 
handful  of  large  firms  does  not  necessarily  mean  that  product  markets  within  that 
industry are highly concentrated. While industry concentration can be used as an initial 
indicator to screen for changes  in the degree of competition,  by itself it can say little 
about whether or not market competition is changing.” [our emphasis] 

Bajgar continues at footnote 3 in that paper: 

“….to get from industry concentration to market competition one needs to be confident 
that  a)  there  is  a  reliable  relationship  between  industry  concentration  and  market 
concentration  (see  OECD,  2018b,  and  Werden  and  Froeb,  2018),  b)  that  market 
concentration is a good indicator of market power (often not the case in differentiated 
product or geographic markets, platform markets and innovative markets); and c) that 
market  power  reflects  a  lack  of  competitive  intensity  rather  than  being  a  sign  of 
competition in action.” 

The  evidence  in  DG  COMP’s  IIA  uses  the  wrong  metric  from  which  to  infer  a  lessening  of 
competition.  It has failed to demonstrate a relationship between industry concentration and 
market concentration, as well as failing to demonstrate that market concentration (which it has 
not measured) leads to the creation of market power.  Finally, as Bajgar highlights, concentration 
might just be a “sign of competition in action”, rather than a priori a competition problem.  

The  referenced  Staff  Working  Document  posits  that  efficiency,  new  technology,  structural 
change  and/or  a  weakening  of  competition  could  all  be  “possible  explanations”  for  higher 
industry (sic) concentration.  Being just one of many “possible explanations” is not a sufficiently 
robust basis on which to make proposals to regulate competition in the entire economy through 
a  New  Competition Tool.  Furthermore,  this  evidence  relates only  to  industry concentration, 
rather than demonstrating cause and effect – that increased industry concentration has led to 
negative  consequences  for  consumers  in  terms  of  price,  quality  and  choice.    It  is  a  factual 
observation about industry concentration made in the paper, not a determinative point about 
persistent supernormal profits of firms in more concentrated product markets.  The change is 
also recent, “following a period of relative stability”, so still potentially transitory, these profits 
might be competed away through the normal process. 

The Staff Working Document continues: 

“The  trend  involving  higher  concentration  ratios  and  markups  is  also  reflected  in 
increased market  power, especially among larger firms.  Possible explanations  include 
changes  in  business  dynamics  and  structure  of  markets.  This  concerns  winner-takes-
most  outcomes,  also  referred  to  as  the  “superstar  firm”  hypothesis,  where  the  more 
productive firms increasingly reap the benefits of network effects and scale economies.” 
[our emphasis] 

Again, possibilities and hypotheses are not a sound basis for wide-ranging untargeted legislation.  
The Staff Working Paper then turns its attention to the issue of digitalisation: 

“The digitalisation of the economy increases the importance of knowledge assets. A few 
firms, especially in digital-intensive sectors, benefit from high and increasing markups 
and gain large market shares due to the intensive use of intangible assets, such as data 
analytics,  and  the  difficult  replication  of  successful  business  models,  together  with 
declining IT capital prices.” 

If  true  (again  this  point  is  asserted  without  evidence),  it  would  point  to  a  targeted  piece  of 
legislation to reduce the market power of the “few firms” in “digital intensive sectors”, not a 

5 

 
potentially horizontal instrument affecting all firms in all sectors.  Such evidence would point to 
DG CNECT’s asymmetric ex-ante solution (option 3b) not an instrument affecting all firms in all 
sectors  as  proposed  by  DG  COMP.  The  latter  would  dramatically  increase  the  potential  for 
overlapping  intervention  in  sectors  which  are  already  subject  to  an  ex-ante  regime,  such  as 
telecom markets. 

The Staff Working Document continues in the same vein: 

“Such outcomes are possibly also going beyond the digital economy. Firm markups have 
also increased, especially among the most successful firms.”  

Here is what the quoted paper from Bajgar (OECD) says on this matter (at paragraph 10 of the 
quoted report): 

“This research suggests that economies appear to be less dynamic, with declining entry 
and exit rates across most OECD economies and increased divergence between top and 
bottom productivity firms. At the same time, market power appears to have increased, 
as  indicated  by  increasing  mark-ups  of  top  firms  and  falling  labour  share  of  income. 
Whether  these  findings  are  the  result  of  a  reduction  in  competition,  or  a  sign  of 
competition  in  action  –  with  market  power  representing  a  temporary  reward  for 
innovative  and  efficient  firms  –  remains  unclear.  Our  results  should,  thus,  not  be 
interpreted as unambiguous evidence of reduced competition, and much less yet of a 
need for particular policy interventions.” [our emphasis] 

Given  the  caution  of  the  authors,  it  is  unclear  why  this  report  and  its  data  are  adduced  as 
evidence in support of DG COMP’s NCT proposal.  The authors explicitly caution against using 
these data to evidence any particular policy intervention.  Yet the OECD report is one of the 
few pieces of “evidence” in the IIA. 

The final bit of evidence used in the Staff Working Document is a report entitled “Globalization 
and the fall of mark-ups.” [our emphasis].  From this, DG COMP’s IIA concludes: 

“More  generally,  price  cost  margins  (as  a  further  markup 
comparatively higher in services than in manufacturing”.  

indicator)  remain 

What one can observe from these data is that the prices of goods have benefited from the scale 
effects  of  global  consumption  and  production,  whereas  services  (which  tend  to  be  more 
localised) have not.  It is also worth noting that the very same Staff Working Document says 
“Excess restrictions in professional services stifle competition and limit market entry. Regulation, 
while  instrumental  in  certain  professional  services,  can  often  be  associated  with  significant 
economic costs through limiting market entry and competition.”  In some services at least, the 
solution is deregulation, not more regulation. 

Another paper is identified in the Staff Working Document as lending support to the assertions 
we expose above; namely “Increasing Differences Between Firms: Market Power and the Macro-
Economy”, Van Reenen 2018, London School of Economics, Centre for Economic Performance. 

The reader does not need to get far beyond the Abstract of the Van Reenen paper to realise it 
does  not  lend  weight  to  the  Commission’s  assertions  in  the  Staff  Working  Paper,  but  rather 
contradicts them: 

“Higher sales concentration and apparent increases in aggregate markups have led to 
the  concern  that  product  market  power  has  risen  substantially  which  is  a  potential 
explanation for the falling labor share of GDP, sluggish productivity growth and other 

6 

 
indicators of declining business dynamism. I suggest that this conclusion is premature. 
Many of the patterns are consistent with a more nuanced view where many industries 
have become “winner take most/all” due to globalization and new technologies rather 
than  a  generalized  weakening  of  competition  due to  relaxed  anti-trust rules  or  rising 
regulation.” [our emphasis] 

DG COMP has adduced no evidence that would justify its proposed new competition tool,  in 
particular  in  a  horizontal  form.    In  fact,  the  evidence  it  has  provided  so  far  contradicts  this 
narrative completely. 

3.  Legal basis 

Going through the IIA, we have clear doubts on the legal basis taken by DG COMP to justify the 
need for this new competition tool, in particular referring to Articles 103 and 114 TFUE for the 
following reasons: 

▪  The NCT is not aimed at giving effect to the principles set out by Articles 101 & 102 of 
the TFEU because it is foreseen to be applied in a “ex-ante” intervention and not related 
to either the behaviour of the targeted company nor based on the breach of antitrust 
rules carried out by a undertaking that enjoys a dominant position in a given market. 
Therefore, the NCT cannot rely on Article 103 TFUE’s grounds to justify its need. 

▪  Article  114  provides  the  legal  grounds  required  by  Commission  to  propose  any 
legislative  tool  aimed  at  harmonising  law  across  Member  States  and  thus  avoiding 
fragmentation in the internal market. However, we believe there are not national laws 
to harmonise either in competition law or sectorial regulation that justify the need for 
the new competition tool. 

It appears to Telefonica that the proposed NCT would need to be justified based on the evidence 
of an enforcement gap in competition law more generally rather than just two assertions in this 
IIA and the coincidental proposal for ex-ante regulation by another DG.  Moreover, we note that 
DG COMP wants to ensure that overlap with the proposals of DG CNECT is minimised, similarly 
it  should  also  be  seeking  to  remove  any  conflicts  with  general  competition  law  and  sector 
specific regulation for other industries.  This is best undertaken in the round, during the review 
of competition law, rather as an adjunct to the proposals of DG CNECT.   

4.  Functioning of any New Competition Tool 

There is no economic justification for a horizontal scope – ruling out Options 1 & 3.  Whatever 
DG COMP finally puts out to further consultation, the proposals need to be much clearer on: 

(1)  The scope of digital platforms – both what is inside this definition and what is specifically 

excluded, such as already economically regulated sectors; 

(2)  The  scale  required  for  a  “single  market”  dimension  –  as  in  antitrust,  how  many  EU 
markets must be affected before the identified problem falls within the scope of any 
new MI tool? 

7 

 
 
 
 
 
 
(3)  The triggers for a market investigation.  The UK MI tool is triggered either by a reference 
from a limited set of external bodies, or following an own initiative study by the CMA.  
This  market  study  phase  is  itself  a  burdensome  exercise  for  the  Authority,  such  that 
embarking on any investigation following on from this must be a serious undertaking. 

(4)  A separation of the investigation function from the executive of DG COMP.  DG COMP 
cannot act as inquisitor, judge and jury in this process.  The UK’s MI tool uses an external 
panel of lay members, the same panels that review mergers under the UK regime.  This 
creates  adequate  distance  between  the  executive  of  the  CMA  and  the  team 
investigating the relevant market. 

(5)  Possibility for the targeted companies to express their views during the whole process: 
the  UK’s  MI tool  sets  out  a  continuous  dialogue  between  the  affected  firms  and  the 
CMA,  mainly  by  means  of  formal  hearings  and  remedies  hearings  when  the  Market 
Study turns to a Market Reference. It should be ensured that DG COMP allows for this 
continuous feedback during the procedure until the final result when the Market Study 
turns to “Phase 2” with the Market Reference where there is a higher likelihood that 
remedies might be imposed. 

(6)  DG  COMP’s  decisions  after  the  market  investigation  procedure  should  focus  on 
recommendations  to  policymakers,  sectorial  regulators  and  only  where  necessary 
remedies on market actors. 

(7)  Remedies should be applicable both to the market under investigation and, where there 
is evidence of anticompetitive tying or leveraging of dominance, to adjacent markets.  
This is a very important feature for gatekeeping platforms. 

(8)  A quick appeals procedure before the Courts is needed in order to lessen, as much as 
possible, the uncertainty and the reputational impact of the targeted undertaking. 

We also see that there is a potential overlap with competition law, in particular  with merger 
procedures.  One feature of merger analysis is to understand whether theories of harm related 
to the merger could be tackled by the specific sector regulatory regime.  It follows that DG COMP 
will need to determine whether, in any given merger scenario, the NCT would be able to deal 
with the competition problem it foresees.  This is just one example, but it shows that given the 
nature of the tool, the NCT should really be considered in relation to competition law overall, 
rather than just the overlap with a potential sector specific ex-ante tool proposed by DG CNECT.  

8 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
