Ref. Ares(2020)4723184 - 09/09/2020

CONFIDENTIAL  
ANNEX TO IMPALA SUBMISSION to the European 
Commission’s public consultation on “Single 
Market – new complementary tool to 
strengthen competition enforcement” 

This	 document	 is	 a	 summary	 of	 IMPALA’s	 response	 to	 the	 European	 Commission’s	
public	 consultation	 on	 “Single	 Market	 –	 new	 complementary	 tool	 to	 strengthen	
competition	enforcement”.	

IMPALA	 was	 established	 in	 April	 2000	 to	 represent	 independent	 music	 companies.	
99%	of	Europe’s	music	companies	are	small,	micro	and	medium	businesses	and	self-
releasing	 artists.	 Known	 as	 the	 “independents",	 they	 are	 world	 leaders	 in	 terms	 of	
innovation	 and	 discovering	 new	 music	 and	 artists.	 IMPALA	 now	 represents	 almost	
5,000	 independent	 music	 companies	 across	 Europe	 dealing	 on	 a	 daily	 basis	 with	
online	platforms	and	accounting	for	more	than	80%	of	all	new	releases	and	80%	of	
the	 sector's	 jobs.	 IMPALA	 welcomes	 the	 Commission’s	 initiatives	 to	 review	 its	
competition	 policies	 and	 tools	 to	 make	 sure	 they	 are	 fit	 for	 purpose	 to	 deal	 with	
competition	issue	that	arise	on	today’s	markets,	especially	digital.	This	is	particularly	
relevant	for	the	music	industry,	where	digital	accounted	for	63.3%	of	the	industry’s	
global	 revenues	 in	 2019.	 In	 Europe,	 streaming	 revenue	grew	 by	24.1%	 in	 2019	 to	
$3.1bn,	 representing	 alone	 more	 than	 half	 (50.9%)	 of	 the	 total	 European	 recorded	
music	market.	

It	is	therefore	crucial	for	our	members	to	have	a	say	in	this	debate.	

State	of	play	
The	role	of	competition	authorities	in	the	relevant	markets	should	be	to	ensure	that	
the	conditions	are	in	place	to	provide	for	a	level	playing	field	in	cultural	markets	-	for	
open	 and	 competitive	 cultural	 markets	 to	 thrive	 with	 a	 diversity	 of	 cultural	
entrepreneurs	and	cultural	works.	High	levels	of	concentration	and	companies	with	
entrenched	 dominant	 positions	 in	 any	 such	 market	 should	 be	 prevented:	 since	
cultural	 goods	 are	 unique	 and	 not	 substitutable,	 the	 impact	 of	 monopolisation	 is	
particularly	 serious	 in	 such	 markets.	 	 Large	 incumbent	 digital	 players	 are	 very	
difficult	to	dislodge	and	likely	to	have	strong	incentives	to	engage	in	anti-competitive	
behaviour:	 this	 scenario	 plays	 out	 in	 music	 markets	 both	 on	 the	 wholesale	 digital	
music	market,	as	well	as	on	the	digital	retail	market.	

The	current	levels	of	concentration	visible	in	the	music	sector,	both	at	wholesale	and	
retail	level,	is	not	compatible	with	the	principle	of	equitable	access	to	the	means	of	
expression	 and	 dissemination.	 Market	 concentration	 has	 a	 detrimental	 effect	 on	
music	sector	SMEs,	artists	and	consumers	alike.	

 
	
	
	
	
	
The	 legal	 bases	 for	 European	 Commission	 intervention	 on	 competition	 grounds,	
Articles	 101	 &	 102	 TFEU,	 are	 not	 sufficient	 to	 address	 the	 structural	 competition	
problems	that	the	music	and	related	digital	markets	are	facing	today:	

•  Article	101	as	an	instrument	is	not	able	to	address	certain	critical	competition	
issues	in	today’s	market.		For	example,	it	is	unlikely	that	Article	101	could	be	
used	to	address	the	structural	competition	issues	raised	by	this	consultation	
because	 it	 is	 a	 legal	 provision	 that	 deals	 with	 anti-competitive	 agreements	
between	 undertakings.	 This	 instrument	 cannot	 be	 used	 in	 relation	 to	
gatekeepers,	for	example,	who	present	SMEs	with	take	it	or	leave	it	trading	
or	 contractual	 terms.	 While	 the	 contract	 partner	 may	 consider	 the	 terms	
unfair	or	anti-competitive,	the	agreement	itself,	if	entered	into,	is	unlikely	to	
fall	within	the	terms	of	Article	101.		Further,	another	disadvantage	of	Article	
101	 in	 this	 context	 is	 that	 it	 is	 an	 ex-post	 instrument,	 rather	 than	 an	
instrument	allowing	preventative	action.			

•  Article	 102	 relies	 on	 competition	 principles	 that	 should	 be	 reviewed	 to	
ensure	 that	 they	 are	 fit	 for	 purpose	 in	 the	 digital	 age.	 This	 may	 mean	
considering	whether	the	concept	of	“dominance”,	"abuse	of	dominance”	and	
the	“essential	facilities”	doctrine	need	to	be	reviewed.		Above	all,	the	concept	
of	 dominance	 and	 how	 it	 is	 established	 should	 be	 considered.	 	 In	 digital	
markets,	 in	 particular,	 there	 may	 be	 issues	 as	 regards	 establishing	 the	
relevant	 market	 in	 which	 a	 finding	 of	 dominance	 may	 be	 made,	 as	 well	 as	
how	to	establish	dominance	itself	in	that	market,	given	that	simply	assessing	
dominance	 through	 market	 share	 based	 on	 turnover	 may	 be	 inappropriate	
and	 there	 may	 be	 other	 criteria	 such	 as	 reach,	 user	 numbers	 and	 access	 to	
data	that	should	be	considered.		More	generally,	market	power	linked	to	the	
concept	 of	 the	 ‘unavoidable	 trading	 partner’	 is	 an	 issue	 in	 the	 digital	
wholesale	and	retail	music	markets	–	including	through	network	effects,	the	
concentration	of	content	on	the	wholesale	market	and	of	reach/users	on	the	
retail	market.			Moreover,	given	that	competition	law	seeks	to	isolate	where	
competition	 problems	 lie,	 an	 approach,	 as	 suggested	 by	 the	 authors	 of	 the	
report	 commissioned	 by	 the	 Commission,	 Competition	 Policy	 for	 the	 digital	
era,	 which	 place	 more	 emphasis	 on	 theories	 of	 harm	 and	 identification	 of	
anti-competitive	strategies	may	be	necessary	in	the	context	of	Article	102.			

However,	 dealing	 with	 the	 type	 of	 structural	 competition	 issues	 raised	 by	 this	
consultation	will	also	require	new	tools	such	as	those	proposed	by	the	Commission	
in	 the	 context	 of	 this	 consultation,	 given	 that	 competition	 problems	 arise	 in	
content/digital	markets	even	where	companies	do	not	have	a	dominant	position.	

In	 addition,	 there	 is	 a	 general	 need	 for	 the	 competition	 rules	 to	 offer	 greater	
protection	 for	 cultural	 diversity	 in	 cultural	 markets.    The	 impact	 of	 behaviour	 on	
consumer	welfare	and	choice	is	a	fundamental	aspect	of	the	Commission’s	analysis	
in	competition	cases.		In	a	content	market	like	the	music	market,	one	of	the	results	
of	 ensuring	 cultural	 diversity	 is	 that	 it	 also	 ensures	 consumer	 choice.	 	 In	 addition,	
Article	167(4)	TFEU	provides	that:	

	
	
	
“The	Community	shall	take	cultural	aspects	into	account	in	its	action	under	the	other	
provisions	of	this	Treaty,	in	particular	in	order	to	respect	and	promote	the	diversity	of	
its	cultures”.		

Lack	 of	 cultural	 diversity	 and	 consumer	 choice	 lead	 to	 consumer	 harm.	 	 The	
competition	rules	should	thus	ensure	a	level	playing	field	in	the	music	sector,	taking	
into	 account	 the	 cultural	 market’s	 specificities.	 Making	 sure	 the	 regulatory	
framework	delivers	a	diversity	of	cultural	works	is	one	of	the	most	important	issues	
for	music	SMEs.	

the	 new	 competition	

Competition	problems	to	address	
We	 believe	
issue	 of	
concentration/oligopoly	in	the	market	and	its	impact;	tipping	markets;	the	behaviour	
of	 gatekeepers	 in	 the	 market;	 and	 the	 issue	 of	 leveraging	 market	 power	 on	 one	
market	into	related	markets.	

should	 address	

tool	

the	

A	particular	concern	that	IMPALA	sees	in	the	digital	retail	music	market	is	ensuring	
competition,	access	and	a	level-playing	field	on	platforms/digital	music	services	for	
all	music	companies,	including	the	SME	independent	music	companies	represented	
by	IMPALA,	and	we	have	provided	examples	of	where	IMPALA	considers	there	are	or	
have	been	problems	ensuring	this.	

It	is	also	important	for	example	to	ensure	that	competition	authorities	are	not	only	
able	to	review	cases	where	companies	with	market	power	buy	up	competitors	but	
also	 problematic	 cases	 where	 minority	 shareholdings	 are	 acquired,	 which	 do	 not	
necessarily	involve	a	change	of	control	for	the	purposes	of	merger	control,	but	form	
a	 type	 of	 creeping	 influence	 allowing	 companies	 to	 stay	 under	 the	 radar	 of	
regulators,	 which	 is	 a	 strategy	 that	 e.g.	 Tencent	 has	 been	 using	 for	 years	 in	 many	
different	sectors	and	across	different	geographic	markets,	as	well	as	companies	like	
Google.		As	regards	mergers,	therefore,	we	call	for	a	change	of	test	for	mergers	to	
allow	 the	 EC	 to	 investigate	 certain	 acquisitions	 of	 minority	 shareholdings	 and	
thereby	 better	 to	 identify	 attempts	 to	 acquire	 creeping	 influence	 and	 thus	 better	
take	 into	 account	 consumer	 welfare.	 	 This	 would	 be	 in	 conjunction	 with	 an	
assessment	that	asks	the	type	of	questions	suggested	by	the	authors	of	Competition	
Policy	 for	 the	 digital	 era	 in	 relation	 to	 acquisitions	 of	 small	 start-ups	 by	 dominant	
platforms.	

It	 is	 also	 critical	 to	 make	 sure	 that	 the	 EU	 can	 address	 issues	 before	 they	 are	
implemented.	 This	 is	 why	 we	 fully	 support	 Executive	 Vice-President	 Vestager’s	
proposal	 to	 make	 more	 use	 of	 precautionary	 measures	 (also	 called	 “interim	
measures”).		It	is	also	why	we	fully	support	the	proposal	for	a	new	competition	tool	
raised	 in	 this	 consultation,	 whereby	 preventive	 action	 could	 be	 taken	 even	 in	
relation	to	companies	that	are	not	yet	dominant.		

The	new	competition	tool	
An	 ex-ante	 tool	 will	 be	 key	 to	 address	 structural	 competition	 problems,	 especially	
the	issue	of	concentration	and	the	emergence	of	gatekeepers,	and	their	behaviour	

	
	
	
	
	
	
once	 they	 emerge,	 if	 providing	 dominance	 is	 an	 issue.	 It	 would	 also	 help	 where	
market	players	with	market	power	but	which	are	not	dominant	use	this	to	leverage	
their	position	into	multiple	related	markets.		

Structural	competition	problems	can	arise	in	any	market,	especially	as	most	markets	
are	being	digitalised.	Moreover,	physical	or	analogue	markets	may	also	be	related	to,	
and	thus	impacted	by	competition	issues	on	related,	digital	markets.	It	is	therefore	
critical	for	this	tool	to	be	applicable	to	all	markets.	

Given	 the	 speed	 at	 which	 markets	 are	 developing	 and	 evolving	 and	 new	 product	
markets	 emerging,	 the	 European	 Commission	 should	 have	 the	 ability	 to	 impose	
remedies	 under	 the	 new	 competition	 tool,	 but	 with	 the	 flexibility	 to	 apply	 lighter	
touch	 measures	 where	 appropriate,	 or	 to	 propose	 legislation	 where	 this	 is	 more	
appropriate.	

The	 European	 Commission	 should	 be	 able	 to	 impose	 structural	 remedies	 if	
necessary.	 In	 IMPALA’s	 experience,	 however,	 some	 issues	 which	 are	 at	 their	 origin	
structural	 may	 be	 remedied	 by	 non-structural	 remedies	 e.g.	 where	 a	 gatekeeper	
imposes	 unfair	 trading	 terms	 while	 others	 require	 the	 imposition	 of	 structural	
remedies	 e.g.	 in	 the	 same	 situation,	 by	 granting	 access	 to	 the	 platform	 it	 owns	 on	
non-discriminatory	terms.		On	the	other	hand,	other	situations,	such	as	the	network	
of	
interlinked	 minority	 shareholdings	 between	 music	 companies	 and	 digital	
providers	 (as	 outlined	 in	 our	 complete	 submission)	 should	 be	 monitored	 and	 if	
remedies	 are	 necessary,	 only	 structural	 remedies	 are	 likely	 to	 be	 effective	 e.g.	
divestitures	or	a	prohibition	of	further	such	acquisitions.	

In	 our	 view,	 voluntary	 measures	 are	 unlikely	 to	 be	 sufficient	 to	 deal	 with	 the	
seriousness	of	the	issues	that	arise	as	a	result	of	structural	competition	problems.	

	
	
	
	
	
