Eu travel tech input to the public consultation on the New Competition Tool  

The New Competition Tool is one of the measures foreseen by the European Commission 
and  aimed  at  making  sure  that  competition  policy  and  rules  are  fit  for  the  modern 
economy.  It  addresses  gaps  in  the  current  EU  rules  identified  on  the  basis  of  the 
Commission’s experience with enforcing the EU competition rules in digital markets. 

Eu travel tech fully shares the assessment made by the European Commission of the need 
to  bring  changes  to  the  current  competition  rules  to  allow  for  enforcement  action 
preserving the competitiveness of markets. Indeed, these last years have been the stage 
of a  broad policy  debate on this  matter,  stirred  by  the  emergence of a subset of large 
consumer-facing  digital  platforms  active  in  several  markets  whose  systemic  role 
threatens the fairness and openness of EU markets.  

In the attached paper, eu travel tech sets out its views on how to complement the existing 
EU competition law toolbox in order to guarantee fair and undistorted competition and a 
level  playing  field  in  the  internal  market.  Digital  platforms,  including  eu  travel  tech 
members1,  provide  consumers  with  significant  benefits  and  account  for  around  60%  of 
private consumption of digital goods and services2. Yet, the growth of  a subset of large 
digital platforms and their increasing tendency to move into new and unrelated markets, 
as well as to show preference to their own products and services to exclude rivals, has 
demonstrated the increased importance to have specific regulation that prevents abuse. 
Intervention based on competition law alone may not be sufficient to address and deter 
such conducts.  

Rather, we believe that existing ex post enforcement should be complemented by an ex 
ante  framework,  which  could  address  certain  limitations  of  antitrust  enforcement, 
ensuring  EU  markets  remain  fair  and  contestable  to  the  benefit  of  consumers.  In  this 
regard, we support the general objective of this initiative: ensuring fair and undistorted 
competition  in  the  internal  market  by  complementing  traditional  antitrust  enforcement 
with a new tool.  

In  this  paper,  eu  travel  tech  does  not  address  specifically  the  features  of  the  New 
Competition Tool as presented by the Commission in its inception impact assessment and 

in  this  public  consultation.  Our  reflections  regarding  the  necessary  changes  to  EU 
competition law, as set out in this paper, are however relevant for many aspects of the 
proposed New Competition Tool. They are borne out of our own experience in the travel 

market and reflect our thinking prior to the Commission’s recent publications. We believe 
that  the  proposals  made  in  this  paper  could  prove  useful  to  feed  the  Commission 
reflections  on  the  New  Competition  Tool  and  in  parallel  on  the  ex ante  regulatory 

1

  eu  travel tech's members  include  Amadeus,  Booking.com,  eDreams ODIGEO,  Expedia Group  and  Travelport. 
Associate  members  include  Skyscanner,  TripAdvisor  and  American  Express  GBT.  Strategic  Partners  include 
Lastminute.com, etraveli, Trainline, Travix, Travelgenio, Hitrail, OAG and CWT 

2

 Commission Staff Working Document, Proposal for a Regulation on promoting fairness and transparency for 
business users of online intermediation services, 26-4-2018 

1 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
instrument of very large online platforms acting as gatekeepers within the Digital Services 
Act.  

About eu travel tech 

eu travel tech represents the interests of travel technology companies. eu travel tech uses 
its position at the centre of the travel and tourism sector to promote a consumer-driven, 
innovative and competitive industry that is transparent and sustainable. Our membership 
(OTA),  Travel 
(GDSs),  Online  Travel  Agencies 
spans  Global  Distribution  Systems 
Management Companies in business travel (TMCs) and metasearch sites.  

Our  members 
include  Amadeus,  Booking.com,  eDreams  ODIGEO,  Expedia  Group, 
Travelport, and Skyscanner. Associate members include American Express GBT. Strategic 
Partners include Lastminute.com, etraveli, Trainline, Travix, Travelgenio, Hitrail, OAG and 
CWT. 

2 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
