Market Investigations for Digital Platforms: 
Panacea or Complement? 

Amelia Fletcher 
Centre for Competition Policy 
University of East Anglia1 

Abstract 

There is a growing international consensus that standard competition law is inadequate for 
addressing the panoply of competition problems arising in digital platform markets. 
Alongside a proposal for ex ante regulation in this arena, the European Commission is 
considering the introduction of a ‘New Competition Tool’ which is broadly modelled on the 
UK Market Investigation instrument.  

This paper abstracts from the specifics of the EU situation and considers the pros and cons 
of market investigations in the context of the UK regime. It concludes that the tool is a 
valuable addition to the standard competition law toolkit, and that this is likely to be true 
also at EU level, both for digital platforms and more widely. However, because the tool is 
potentially so powerful and flexible, it merits strong procedural checks and balances, to 
guard against confirmation bias or politicisation. The tool also has important limitations and 
thus should not be viewed as a full solution to the issues raised by digital platforms, but 
rather as a valuable complementary tool alongside new ex ante regulation. 

1 The author is also a Non-Executive Board Member at the Competition Markets Authority. She was also a 
member of the UK Government-commissioned Digital Competition Expert Panel which published Unlocking 
Digital Competition in March 2019. The author would like to thank Martin Cave, Steve Davies, Alexandre De 
Streel, Paul Dobson, Richard Feasey, Adam Land, Liza Lovdahl Gormson, Bruce Lyons, Philip Marsden and 
Massimo Motta for useful comments. However, all views expressed here are her own.  

1 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1.  Introduction 

There is a growing international consensus that standard competition law, while valuable, is 
inadequate for addressing the panoply of competition problems arising in digital platform 
markets. In 2019 alone, there were a wide array of policy reports published, across many 
different jurisdictions, all identifying concerns with existing powers in this area and the need 
for reform.2 A number of jurisdictions are currently considering legislative changes to 
address these issues, with Germany proposing to amend its competition law to play a more 
regulatory role3, while the UK, Australia and Japan are all taking practical steps towards 
introducing pro-competitive ex ante regulation.4 

In its own quest to address these concerns, the European Commission is currently 
considering the potential introduction of two new legal powers: a ‘New Competition Tool’ 
and an ‘ex ante regulatory instrument for large online platforms’.5 A menu of different 
variants of both are offered up for comment.  

A likely runner for ‘New Competition Tool’ (Option 3) appears to be broadly modelled on 
the UK’s Market Investigation (MI) powers under the Enterprise Act 2002. These enable the 
UK Competition and Markets Authority (CMA) to identify and remedy situations in which 
there are ‘features of a market’ that create an ‘adverse effect on competition’.  

2 The three most prominent reports are those from the EC (J. Crémer, Y-A. de Montjoye and H. Schweitzer, 
Competition policy for the digital era, Report to the European Commission, 2019); UK (J. Furman, D. Coyle, A. 
Fletcher, D. McAuley and P. Marsden, Unlocking Digital Competition, 2019); US (F. Scott Morton, Bouvier, P., 
Ezrachi, A., Jullien, A., Katz, R., Kimmelman, G., Melamed, D. and J. Morgenstern, Committee for the Study of 
Digital Platforms, Market Structure and Antitrust Subcommittee, Stigler Center for the Study of the Economy 
and the State, 2019). In addition, there have been reports from Australia (ACCC, Digital Platforms Enquiry: 
Final Report, 2019); Benelux (Joint memorandum of the Belgian, Dutch and Luxembourg competition 
authorities on challenges faced by competition authorities in a digital world, 2019); BRICS (BRICS in the digital 
economy: Competition policy in practice, 2019); France (G. Longuet et al., Report at the French Senate on 
digital sovereignty, 2019); Germany (M. Schallbruch, H. Schweitzer and A. Wambach, A new competition 
framework for the digital economy: Report by the Commission ‘Competition Law 4.0’, 2019); Italy (AGCM, 
AGCOM, AGPDP, Big Data Joint Survey, 2019); Japan (FTC, Report regarding trade practices on digital 
platforms, 2019); Netherlands (Ministry of Economic Affairs and Climate Policy, Future-proofing of competition 
policy in regard to online platforms, 2019); Portugal (Autoridade da Concurrencia, Digital Ecosystems, Big Data 
and Algorithms, 2019); UNCTAD (Competition issues in the digital economy, 2019). 
3 For an unofficial English translation, see: https://www.d-kart.de/wp-content/uploads/2020/02/GWB10-Engl-
Translation-2020-02-21.pdf. 
4 See for Australia (Government Response and Implementation Roadmap for the Digital Platforms Inquiry, 
2019, https://treasury.gov.au/publication/p2019-41708 and for the UK (Digital markets taskforce: terms of 
reference, 2020 (https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/digital-markets-taskforce-terms-of-
reference/digital-markets-taskforce-terms-of-reference--3). For Japan, an English language description of 
Government proposals can be found at: White and Case (2020) The Japan Cabinet proposed Direction of Bill for 
Digital Platform Transparency Act, https://www.whitecase.com/sites/default/files/2020-01/the-japan-cabinet-
proposed-direction-of-bill-for-digital-platform-transparency-act.pdf. 
5 See: https://ec.europa.eu/commission/presscorner/detail/en/ip_20_977 and 
https://ec.europa.eu/info/law/better-regulation/have-your-say/initiatives/12418-Digital-Services-Act-
package-ex-ante-regulatory-instrument-of-very-large-online-platforms-acting-as-gatekeepers.  

2 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
What should we think about such an introduction of a MI tool in this context? Is it likely to 
be a valuable complement to the Commission’s existing competition powers? Will it be a 
panacea for digital competition concerns?  

This article reflects on these questions, based on recent UK experience of market 
investigations. It concludes that the tool has major positives and would be a valuable 
addition to the Commission’s toolkit, in digital markets and more widely. However, as was 
concluded in the 2019 UK Unlocking Digital Competition report, the MI tool also has 
limitations and should not be viewed as a full solution to digital platform issues. In 
particular, although it has huge flexibility in designing and implementing remedies, the 
process of monitoring, enforcing and revisiting these remedies over time has some 
important limitations. 

In focusing on the UK situation, this article does not endeavour to consider the complexities 
of introducing this tool at EC level. Nevertheless, certain aspects of the UK system may well 
be relevant to its effectiveness. The fact that the CMA has both competition and consumer 
powers is valuable, since many market studies effectively address issues that would 
otherwise ‘fall through the cracks’ between these two areas of law. The UK’s system of 
concurrency between the CMA and sector regulators is also important, at least for the 
monitoring and enforcement of MI remedies in these sectors.  

The statutory requirements around governance within the UK process are also relevant, and 
specifically the need for separation between the decision-makers who decide to commence 
an MI, following an initial market study, and those reach findings at the end of an MI. 
Finally, the international context for intervention may of course be different at EC level than 
for the CMA as a UK-focused authority.  

2.  Positives of the Market Investigation tool  

In the UK, MIs are used as a complementary instrument alongside other competition 
powers, and this would also be the case at EU level. So what advantages does this tool have 
in this context? What can it do that existing EC competition law cannot? The remarks below 
consider some key benefits in relation to scope, remedies and procedure.  

(i) 

Scope 

While standard competition powers and MIs are both focused on improving competition, 
there are number of subtle but important differences between them in terms of scope. 

A proactive role in promoting competition 

Most competition law provisions are primarily focused on preventing competition from 
becoming worsened, for example through mergers, collusion or abuse of dominance. A 
valuable contribution of MIs is that they can play a more proactive role in promoting 
increased competition. So, for example, they can introduce market opening measures that 
are intended to shift the whole nature of competition. The Open Banking measures which 
arose from the UK Retail Banking MI are a good example, in that they were designed to 

3 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
open up the potential for disruptive and innovative competition from new technologies and 
business models. 

A broader and more holistic approach 

Standard competition law is primarily focused on the conduct of firms, albeit this conduct is 
considered within its market context and thus wider market characteristics can play a role. 
By contrast, MIs are designed more broadly to tackle any and all ‘features’ of markets which 
are found to adversely affect competition. While such features can include firm conduct, 
they can also comprise factors such as economies of scale and scope, network effects, 
regulatory and structural barriers, and consumer behavioural factors. Remedies are 
frequently targeted at addressing these other factors, as opposed to restricting 
anticompetitive conduct by firms. 

MIs also allow for the investigation of a far wider set of competition concerns than the 
abuse of dominance and explicit collusion that are core target of standard competition law. 
Indeed, neither dominance nor explicit collusion have been found to be concerns in the 
CMA’s most recent MIs.6  

On the supply side, for example, they can examine subtle complexities in the nature of 
strategic interdependence between firms, including the potential for tacit coordination. 
Indeed, the ability to examine ‘tight oligopolies’ is a key benefit of the regime. The 2014 
Aggregates, Cement and Ready-mix Concrete MI is a good example. The Competition 
Commission (the CMA’s precursor) identified a combination of structural and conduct 
features that were leading to coordination and higher prices. These were addressed through 
clear structural measures (divestment and market transparency reduction), rather than via 
more direct, but arguably harder to police, behavioural requirements on firms to cease 
colluding. MIs can also consider the implications for firm incentives of factors such as 
vertical integration, principal-agent issues or regulatory barriers. 

On the demand side, meanwhile, MIs can consider firm conduct that might dampen or 
distort competition through making consumer decision-making difficult. Examples might 
include failing to provide clear and comparable information, refusing to deal with price 
comparison website services, including contractual terms that make switching costly or 
making the process of switching cumbersome. Firms can be required to make changes to 
their conduct in these areas. While such factors may seem to have more in common with 
consumer law than competition law, they are not typically covered by consumer law and 
can have very significant implications for competition, even in relatively non-concentrated 
markets.  

MIs are especially well designed to carry out the holistic analysis of markets where problems 
are market-wide and there are a variety of interwoven factors – structural and behavioural 
– creating competition concerns. By contrast, in standard competition cases, authorities 

6 These have examined Energy (final report, 2016), Retail Banking (2016), Investment Consultants (2018) and 
Funerals (ongoing). 

4 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
tend to be funnelled into focusing more narrowly on one issue and (in abuse cases) one 
firm.  

MIs can also address markets can which have become ‘stuck’ in bad equilibria, which are 
good for neither firms nor society, but where some form of intervention is required to make 
the shift to a better equilibrium. For example, it may not be in the interest of any individual 
energy company to make it easier for their own consumers to switch supplier, even if the 
whole market would work more effectively and consumer trust would be increased if 
switching was generally easier.   

No role for culpability or intent 

Even to the extent that firm conduct is relevant, the focus of MIs is firmly on anti-
competitive effects. It is not relevant for MIs whether conduct it is deliberately anti-
competitive or whether firms are otherwise culpable for the harm. Indeed, even if the 
conduct in question creates efficiency benefits for consumers over the short term, and thus 
may well reflect a short run pro-consumer focus on the part of firms, it could still be found 
to create an adverse effect on competition if there is likely to be a consequent loss of 
competition that would harm consumers over the medium to long term. By contrast, while 
the role of intent in abuse of dominance cases is somewhat ill-defined, it is typically 
considered hard to sanction a firm that can show it is acting in its own short-run interest, 
with no strategic anti-competitive intent, or at least a finding of culpability.  

No need to fit within antitrust precedent or policy 

The targeted market-specific nature of MI analysis and remedies, and the lack of any need 
to show culpability, means that only limited consideration is given to wider deterrence and 
precedence. This could be seen as a negative, given the important role that wider 
deterrence plays in competition law generally and in providing legal certainty for firms. 
However, it does provide for more freedom to carry out economic analysis without being 
unduly constrained by the policy approaches and precedent from past cases.  

For example, while the MI process does involve a market definition exercise, this is not 
given the same weight as it is in abuse of dominance cases. The focus is quite properly on 
the analysis of competitive constraints. (This should of course also be the case in 
competition law more widely but in practice is not).  

It also means that MIs are better able than standard competition law to consider the wider 
context, and in particular the complex interplay between competition and other policy areas 
such as privacy, consumer policy and fairness, and environmental issues. The CMA is 
especially alert to these links, given its dual role as a competition and consumer authority, 
and the UK system of concurrency with sector regulators.  

5 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Implications for digital markets 

This ability to look at a panoply of interrelated issues across a market, or markets7, without 
any need to demonstrate culpability, is likely to be especially useful in digital platform 
markets. As was highlighted in the 2019 Unlocking Digital Competition report: “The 
challenges to effective competition in digital markets do not come about solely because of 
platforms’ anti-competitive behaviour and acquisition strategies.”  

In these markets, the issues frequently arise from a combination of complex interleaving of 
firm conduct, consumer behaviour, economic characteristics, technological factors, and 
various aspects of regulation. Promoting competition in this sector will therefore not be 
purely about limiting anti-competitive conduct, important as that is. It will also require more 
proactive measures.  

The Commission’s Inception Impact Assessment for its proposed New Competition Tool 
highlights the potential to use the tool in relation to (i) markets displaying systemic failures 
going beyond the conduct of a particular company with market power or (ii) oligopolistic 
market structures with an increased risk for tacit collusion. Both of these objectives fit well 
with past experience of the MI regime. 

The Commission’s Impact Assessment also emphasises the potential use of the tool to 
intervene early to prevent markets from tipping, an issue of particular relevance in markets 
that exhibit strong network effects, such as digital platform markets. It is entirely true that 
such interventions may be difficult to make under standard competition law, given the 
absence of existing single firm dominance. However, it should be admitted that the UK has 
limited experience of using MIs to this particular end. 

The ability to consider carefully the synergies and tensions between interrelated policy 
objectives is likely to be important in digital markets, for example given the importance of 
consumer data and thus the relevance of privacy policy. 

The reduced role played by market definition may also be valuable in digital markets, given 
the complexities involved in a formal market definition process in this context. These largely 
arise from the wide spectrum of organisational types and relations we observe. We know 
that digital players can compete despite some having closed ecosystems while others have 
open; despite some acting only on one side of a market, while others are multi-sided; 
despite some being integrated into interface activities, while others are stand-alone. These 
factors are important to examine carefully when assessing competition, but it is unhelpful to 
unduly constrain this analysis by forcing it into a narrow market definition exercise. Indeed, 
it could be argued that a weakness of competition law – and especially abuse of dominance 
provisions – is that the legal framework requires the boundaries of firms and markets to be 
defined in unrealistically black-and-white terms. 

7 The scope of MI powers was extended to allow the investigation of cross-market practices (as opposed to 
specific defined markets) by the Enterprise and Regulatory Reform Act 2013. This wider scope has, however, 
not yet been used. 

6 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii)  

Remedies 

The discussion above focused on comparing MIs with standard competition law. However, 
the European Commission is of course already able to carry out Sector Inquiries, which have 
significant similarities with MIs. So what incremental benefits do MIs bring? 

Traditionally, an important aspect of the UK MI regime was that it included powerful 
information gathering powers, which could be used to ‘shine a light’ into markets in order to 
understand the barriers to competition that may exist. Since 2014, however, the CMA now 
has the same powers in respect of its market studies. Market studies can precede an MI, as 
a form of first stage review, but they can also be stand-alone reviews. As such, they are 
similar to the European Commission’s own Sector Inquiries, albeit the Commission has the 
additional ability to carry out dawn raids, a power which is not available to the CMA for 
either market studies or MIs. Like EC Sector inquiries, UK market studies can also be useful 
for generating recommendations for legislation, advocacy, or enforcement.  

As such, the primary additional benefits of MIs – over both UK market studies and EC Sector 
Inquiries – derive from its formal remedy-making powers. 

A broad remedy toolkit 

If an adverse effect on competition is identified, the CMA is required to achieve as 
comprehensive a solution as is reasonable and practicable. The toolkit of potential MI 
remedies is extremely broad, so long as they are effective and proportionate to the 
identified concerns.8 The main limitations are the requirement to target Orders at identified 
firms, which limits the potential to  introduce non-firm-specific horizontal regulation9, and 
(to date at least) the need to respect EC Modernisation and EC maximum harmonisation 
provisions.10   

This breadth of opportunity could be viewed negatively, as allowing excessive scope for 
intervention. Indeed, the sorts of interventions imposed through MIs can be similar to those 
more typically imposed in other jurisdictions though legislation, but without any process of 
parliamentary review.11 This reflects a wider UK focus on enabling competition-focused 
interventions, free of political consideration, but is also partly why there are tight checks 
and balances within the MI process, as discussed further below. 

8 Remedies can be agreed with firms through undertakings or imposed on firms through Orders. While the 
provisions that can be imposed through Orders are formally constrained by legislation, the wording is 
sufficiently broad to allow most options. (See Enterprise Act 2002, Schedule 8). There is no constraint on what 
can be imposed through undertakings.  
9 Although note that MIs can also lead to recommendations to Government to introduce such regulation. 
10 EC Modernisation provisions limit the ability of the CMA to impose remedies in relation to agreements 
which would be exempt from EC competition law, most relevantly vertical restraints which fall under the 
vertical restraints block exemption. EC maximum harmonisation provisions, such as within consumer 
protection or financial services regulations, may limit the ability of the CMA to impose more intrusive 
remedies than already required by law in some areas. 
11 Some MIs have in fact been followed by domestic and/or EU legislation that supersedes the original 
remedies, and the CMA has an ongoing programme of reviewing and sometimes revoking old Orders, partly 
for this reason. See: https://www.gov.uk/cma-cases?case_type%5B%5D=review-of-orders-and-undertakings. 

7 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
However, the breadth of potential remedies also brings clear benefits. While standard 
competition law remedies tend to be narrow and backward-looking, MI remedies can be 
forward-looking and market-wide, with remedies frequently applying across the market, 
irrespective of individual firm market power. A package of remedies may be used to address 
different aspects of market failure. Supply-side measures may be utilised to reduce market 
power directly or to limit the potential for its exploitation, for example through tacit 
collusion or exclusionary behaviour. Demand side remedies are designed to enhance 
consumer engagement and decision-making, through improved disclosure requirements 
and facilitating consumer search and switching, or to protect consumers against unfair 
treatment.  

Table 1, setting out a non-exhaustive selection of MI remedies, provides a flavour of the 
range of different remedies that may be utilised in market investigations. 

Table 1: A Selection of MI Remedies, 2003-2016 

Regulatory 
remedies 

Changes to regulatory 
framework  

Airports, Groceries, Local Buses, Audit, 
Energy 

Improved info for regulators 
Price regulation 

Demand-side 
remedies 

Disclosure requirements 

Measures to facilitate/ 
enhance search  

Measures to improve 
consumer engagement or 
switching 

Fair terms for consumers 

Airports 
Classified Directories, Energy (pre-
payment customers) 

Liquified Petroleum Gas (LPG), Home 
credit, Store Cards, Private Healthcare, 
Motor Insurance, Banking 

Home credit, Payment Protection 
Insurance (PPI), Audit, Payday, Extended 
warranties, Banking 
LPG, Extended Warranties. Home Credit, 
Banking, Energy 

Home Credit, Extended Warranties, 
Store Cards, Banking 

Point-of-sale prohibition 
Data portability 

PPI 
Banking (Open Banking)  

Supply-side 
remedies 

Access to key inputs 

Local buses 

Transparency reduction 

Aggregates 

Unbundling  
Limits on restrictions in 
agreements 
Limits on referral incentives  
Divestment 

PPI, Store Cards, LPG 
Groceries, Audit, Motor Insurance 

Private Healthcare 
Airports, Aggregates 

8 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Structural  
remedies 

Market share/expansion 
limits 
Market redesign 

Classified Directories, Groceries 

Energy (settlement market)  

MI remedies can potentially also extend beyond a specific example of an issue that has been 
analysed, so long as this can be justified through the economic analysis. Again, this is 
potentially relevant to digital platforms. At the completion of the Google Shopping case, DG 
Competition was only able to impose a remedy relating to Google Shopping. It could not 
extrapolate from its findings and impose rules relating to analogous behaviour by Google in 
other vertical search markets such as job search, hotel search or local search. It is true that 
follow-on cases are easier to bring once an initial decision has been reached, but each case 
still needs to be assessed and proven individually. By contrast, an MI in this area might 
potentially have led to Orders which restricted Google from engaging in this sort of 
behaviour more generally, beyond the specific example of Google Shopping, so long as it 
could be shown that the same conclusions were likely to apply. 

It is worth noting that, where the Orders arising from MIs are behavioural, they effectively 
constitute a form of ex ante regulation in that they govern future firms’ behaviour. This is 
true for both supply-side remedies such a transparency reduction requirements and 
demand-side remedies such as disclosure requirements.  

This ability to introduce small-scale ex ante regulation can be especially valuable in markets 
which require intervention in order to work more effectively, but which are not covered by 
a sector regulator. It can also be a valuable complementary tool in regulated markets, 
where the issue in question is not within the scope of the regulation, or where the regulator 
does not otherwise have the requisite powers to address it.  

Finally, while interventions are typically designed to enhance competition, they can also be 
used to protect consumers from the harm arising from limited competition. For example, 
the CMA introduce a safeguard price cap for pre-payment energy customers following the 
MI into the energy market. These customers were found to be frequently vulnerable, 
relatively unlikely to switch provider, and at risk of exploitation.  

Structural remedies: A brief comment 

As is clear in the above table, the UK MI regime also allows for structural remedies to 
market problems. This power is much touted, but it is utilised rarely in practice. It can be 
difficult to demonstrate that such an interventionist remedy is required, as the CMA found 
to its cost in 2016 when it was forced to abandon its attempts to require hospital 
divestments, following an appeal and remittal in relation to its private healthcare MI. 

Divestment is arguably most likely to be required in situations where firms have effectively 
found to be single-firm dominant (albeit that terminology is not used), such that it might 
have been feasible to extract similar remedies under existing EC competition law. However, 
it can be applied where a lack of competition is harming consumers, even if there is no clear 
abuse. An example might be the divestiture of London and Scottish airports which resulted 

9 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
from the BAA airports MI. Here, the concerns related to weak investment and poor user-
responsiveness, resulting from very high market shares and barriers to entry alongside 
inadequacies in the regulatory system. It is far from clear whether this would constitute 
abuse under Article 102. 

That said, structural remedies can potentially be imposed in a wider set of circumstances, 
following an MI, if existing market structure if found to be contributing to an adverse effect 
on competition. The 2014 report requiring structural remedies in the UK aggregates sector 
was based on a careful economic analysis of the complex vertical oligopoly situation in the 
UK. It is not obvious that single firm dominance would have been found. 

However, it is important that the existence of MIs is not viewed as a rationale for weakening 
(or even not strengthening) the merger regime. While it is theoretically true that an MI 
could be used to unwind an anticompetitive merger, this would be bad public policy given 
the high costs involved in ‘unscrambling’ mergers post-integration. In a different but 
analogous context, this is shown by the difficulties experienced in trying to address 
breaches of state aid law in the UK banking sector through structural remedies. 

Implications for digital markets 

There are limitations to use the of MIs in a digital context, as will be discussed further 
below. As such, the 2019 Unlocking Digital Competition report argued for the introduction 
of pro-competitive digital platform regulation rather than relying purely on the MI tool. The 
alternative – addressing concerns through a series of MIs – would lead to a series of 
behavioural remedies that would require ongoing monitoring, and thus effectively turn the 
CMA into a mini-regulator by default anyway, but with the risk that such regulation would 
take a somewhat piecemeal and imperfect form.12  

However, even with the introduction of pro-competitive digital platform regulation, it 
remains likely that MIs will still have an important role to play in digital markets, with its 
likely focus depending partly on the powers and scope of the new regulation. 

The breadth of potential remedy types, and the ability to develop a package of remedies, is 
likely to be especially valuable, given the complex set of drivers for the issues arising in 
many digital markets. For example, data portability provisions, such as those introduced 
through the CMA’s Open Banking remedy, may well be valuable for opening a number of 
digital platform markets, including social media. Other valuable supply-side remedies might 
include interoperability provisions, non-discrimination requirements, a ban on paying for 
default position, requirements to deal, or requirements to provide data access. 

The demand-side is also very important in digital markets. As such, there may also be 
potential for remedies that improve consumer decision-making. For example, in its recent 
market study into Online Platforms and Digital Advertising, the CMA identified a number of 
possible remedies designed to given consumers greater control over their own data, 

12 There are also funding implications. In the UK, sector regulators are typically funded by industry participants, 
so a specialist digital regulator would likely be funded by levies on designated firms. By contrast, the CMA is 
funded by UK taxpayers, with no powers to levy firms to fund its work in monitoring and enforcing remedies.  

10 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
including requiring the major platforms funded by digital advertising to be more transparent 
with consumers about the data they are providing and to ensure that the associated choice 
architecture really acts to facilitate informed consumer choice.13 One could also envisage 
more general remedies, applying to all platforms with very substantial market shares, to 
ensure that they do not unfairly utilise the choice architecture on their platforms, or unfairly 
design their algorithms, to steer consumers towards additional services or towards their 
own products.   

Of course, as discussed above, structural separation through divestment is also a possibility. 
This could be a valuable option in certain digital markets, as could less intrusive forms of 
separation such as operational separation or requirements that are directly targeted at 
addressing conflicts of interest arising from integration.  

(iii) 

Procedure 

Two-stage process with separate decision-making 

The independence and robustness of MIs is bolstered by the associated governance. There 
is a clear split of decision making between the decision to refer a market for investigation, 
which is taken by the CMA Board, and the final MI decision, which are made by a Group of 
independent decision-makers, drawn from the CMA Panel. CMA Panel members are all 
highly experienced, non-political, and bring a diversity of expertise and viewpoints. They are 
not CMA staff. The Group members for each MI are named publicly.  

MIs effectively constitute the second phase of a two-stage process. The first stage, which 
takes the form of a 12-month market study, carries out initial market analysis and considers 
whether a market investigation ‘reference’ is warranted.14 Prior to the creation of the CMA, 
the two phases occurred in two separate bodies; the market study and referral decision 
were taken by the Office of Fair Trading and the investigation was carried out by the 
Competition Commission. To limit the risk of confirmation bias within the CMA, post-
merger, rules require that there is no overlap of people between the Board members who 
take the reference decision and the Group members taking the final MI decision.  

As well as limiting confirmation bias, this two-stage process is also valuable for avoiding the 
MI process becoming a depository for unpopular political issues that no one else wants to 
tackle. These will typically be considered through a market study instead. This affords the 
CMA the same investigatory powers as an MI, but none of the formal remedial powers.  

The two-stage process can also be utilised to extract formal undertakings from parties at the 
end of a market study in lieu of a MI reference. For example, the UK telecoms regulator has 
utilised this process to extract undertaking from telecoms infrastructure provider, 
Openreach. Like the European Commission’s own Sector Inquiries, market studies can also 
lead to recommendations to Government or sector regulators, advocacy, guidance or 
enforcement action, without any MI reference being made. 

13 CMA, Online Platforms and Digital Advertising: Market Study Final Report, 1 July 2020.  
14 MIs are sometimes known as MIRs (or Market Investigation References) for this reason. 

11 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Transparency 

An important positive of MIs is that the overall procedure is very transparent. During the 
process, the CMA will publish: an initial issues statement; working papers and an annotated 
issues statement; provisional findings and possible remedies notice (if relevant); provisional 
decision on remedies (if relevant); and a final report. Any interested party can comment on 
the intermediate documents. While confidential information will be redacted, sufficient 
information will typically be made public to allow effective consideration of the issues. 
Responses from parties are typically also published. There are hearings with parties at key 
stages, attended by the full decision-making Group.  

A more participative approach 

This level of transparency is substantially greater than that in standard competition law and 
allows for a robust and participative approach. Indeed, while market investigations clearly 
need to be well-evidenced and robust and issues are hard-fought, the engagement between 
the CMA and parties nevertheless tends to be more open, less adversarial and less legalistic 
in MIs than in standard competition law cases relating to abuse of dominance or anti-
competitive agreements.  

As well as transparency, this less adversarial approach may reflect the economic focus of the 
analysis, the very limited role played by legal precedent, and also the fact that market 
investigations can end up anywhere – including a finding of no adverse effect on 
competition – so parties have much to gain from engaging openly with the process. 
Remedies can even turn out to be unexpectedly positive for firms. The early (1993) 
requirement on British Gas to divest its distribution business is a case in point. The 
combined valuation of the two separate companies quickly exceeded that of the original 
vertically integrated incumbent. Moreover, good remedies can make the market work 
better, and firms will understand this even they don’t necessarily like it. 

MIs also seem to be less subject to appeal and standard competition law cases. This 
difference of approach may partly reflect the different appeal standard in the UK; MI 
findings can be appealed on a Judicial Review (JR) basis only, while Competition Act 1998 
cases receive a Full Merits review. In the context of such a JR, the high levels of 
transparency and other procedural safeguards could also play a role. Certainly, appellants 
have rarely been successful in challenging MI decisions, and from the authority’s successes, 
it is clear that the CMA has a wide margin of appreciation with its diagnosis of problems and 
judgement as to which remedies are effective and proportionate. 

Another relevant factor is that there are no fines, and thus no quantum of penalty to be 
challenged on appeal. Perhaps less positively, an alternative explanation for the low number 
of appeals is that, with several companies involved, each one faces a free-rider problem in 
choosing whether to appeal; the appeal costs fall to the individual firm while the benefits of 
any appeal success would typically go to all.  

12 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.  Limitations of the Market Investigation tool 

The above discussion, while focussed on the UK experience, clearly suggests that an MI 
regime could also have merit at EU level. However, it is also important to highlight some 
important limitations of the tool, not least because these might be useful when determining 
its precise design. 

Timetables and remedy testing 

MIs must be completed within 18 months, albeit with the potential for extension by another 
six months. The final report, at the end of this period, must include not only the substantive 
findings but also any remedies to be imposed, together with the underlying evidence for 
both.  

There are some positives from a tight timeline. It helps to engage minds; early intervention 
can reduce extent of consumer detriment; and it can be especially important to intervene 
quickly if competition concerns are worsening over time, for example because a market is 
quickly – but avoidably – tipping towards monopoly. It has also proven to be possible to 
complete a reasonably robust analysis of the substantive market issues within this 
timeframe, greatly aided by the initial market analysis that is carried out at the market study 
phase of the process which can take up to a year and occurs prior to reference.  

What has proven harder is to carry out effective remedy design on such a tight timetable. In 
the past, this issue was exacerbated by a policy approach which determined that remedies 
should not be considered until adverse findings had been identified. While such an 
approach might appear reasonable, it is simply impracticable. Remedy design is complex, 
and it is easy to get it wrong. As such, potential remedies are now considered from the start 
of the process, and sometimes even (informally) before the formal MI launch.  

While this is a positive change, the available time is still frequently insufficient for designing 
complex remedies or properly piloting remedies, for example through the use of 
randomised controlled trials. That said, creative solutions may be available. For the 
consumer engagement remedies arising in the recent energy and banking MIs, the final 
remedy design, testing and implementation was left to the relevant sector regulators, who 
could take the required time to do this properly. The CMA imposed on the parties a 
requirement to engage with such trials. Likewise, due to the complexity and likely time and 
resources involved in its Open Banking remedy, the CMA required that a new entity be set 
up and tasked with the detailed design and implementation of the remedy. 

Limited flexibility to revisit remedies 

A more serious problem with the MI regime is that remedies cannot be revisited once they 
have been formally imposed, if they are found to be imperfectly designed or ineffective. 
There is only a provision for parties to request that remedies be altered or removed if they 
can demonstrate that there has been a ‘material change in circumstances’ since they were 
imposed.  

13 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
In considering the impact of this inability to alter a remedy package, it is interesting to note 
the parallel experience of market studies carried out by the UK Financial Conduct Authority. 
These can also give rise to remedies, but because this is done through changes to regulatory 
rules, there is flexibility to trial remedies and revisit. In some cases, the FCA has completely 
abandoned specific remedy proposals, following testing, and the remedy package has been 
(or is being) substantially revised to make it more effective.  

Such flexibility is arguably in the interest of both firms and consumers; no one gains from 
costly, ineffective regulation. The CMA recently highlighted that there may be potential for 
a change in its powers which would enable it, within a fixed period of time, to revisit its 
remedy package while continuing to rely on its substantive findings on competition.15  

The inability to flex remedies may be especially problematic in dynamic markets which are 
subject to significant change. In such markets, the identified concerns may be fairly 
persistent (although this is not a given), but the appropriate remedies may well require 
flexing as the markets and technologies change. This was one reason why the Unlocking 
Digital Competition report took the view that market investigations, while potentially useful, 
were unlikely to provide a complete solution in digital platform markets. 

Limitations to remedy enforcement 

Since the majority of MI remedies are behavioural and quasi-regulatory, there needs to be 
some process for monitoring and enforcing them. In markets which are overseen by sector 
regulators, this task can potentially be passed to them, to be carried out alongside other 
monitoring and enforcement activity.  

In other markets, the CMA has an experienced and expert remedy monitoring team to 
manage this process. The ability to impose reporting requirements as part of a remedy can 
be valuable for facilitating this process and maximising the impact of the CMA resources 
involved. In a number of instances, the CMA has also used a third-party implementation or 
monitoring body, funded by the companies involved. For example, the Open Banking 
Implementation Entity was funded by the nine major UK banks and able to draw in technical 
expertise on standard-setting and implementation of APIs.  

However, the resources and expertise required to carry out quasi-regulatory remedies 
monitoring in a complex environment should not be understated. In a digital context, with 
the potential for market interventions relating to highly complex areas such as 
interoperability, standard-setting and algorithmic design, the required monitoring could 
quickly start to look more like that carried out by the telecoms and financial regulators, 
rather than that typically done within the CMA’s remedies team. This was another reason 
why the Unlocking Digital Competition report took the view that market investigations, 
while potentially useful, an ex ante regulator was also required. 

15 See letter to then Secretary of State Greg Clark MP from CMA Chair Lord Andrew Tyrie, 21 February 2019, 
footnote 27. 
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/781151/
Letter_from_Andrew_Tyrie_to_the_Secretary_of_State_BEIS.pdf.  

14 

 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
A further limitation of the CMA’s enforcement powers is that it has no direct ability to 
impose sanctions for breach. It can only go to Court to obtain a court order, breach of which 
could then be penalised. Even then the penalties are typically low. This is unlikely to provide 
effective enforcement mechanism for breaches, especially for large firms such as the major 
digital platforms. The CMA has written to Government requesting that this situation be 
changed.16  

A final challenge arises where parties’ assets are located outside the UK, or integrated into 
other parts of their global business. While the CMA can always impose Orders where they 
are relevant to the UK market, the monitoring and enforcement of compliance in such 
circumstances may be complex and entail legal proceedings in another jurisdiction. This may 
well be a relevant issue in digital markets, especially if different authorities take conflicting 
approaches to the same issues, creating a clear need for discussion and collaboration with 
international counterparties. In this regard, activity at European level – through a new 
competition tool - may prove rather easier than national-level interventions. 

Unduly high public expectations 

A final negative of MI is arguably more political than substantive. It is the corollary of one of 
the major positives; the ability to impose very significant remedies. Unless expectations are 
very carefully managed, this can lead to the build-up of unduly high expectations around 
MIs, which can in turn generate intense dissatisfaction with the CMA’s performance when it 
concludes that only moderate remedies are justified. The CMA faced substantial criticism of 
this sort in 2016, at the conclusion of two major market investigations into retail banking 
and energy. 

There can also be a need to manage expectations about the likely speed and scale of impact 
for MI remedies. In some markets, while remedies can reduce the extent of competition 
problems, they may not be able to overcome them entirely. Meanwhile, some remedies – 
indeed, often the better remedies such as Open Banking – can take some time to be 
effective. 

4.  A Complementary role for MIs and ex ante regulation in digital markets 

The UK experience suggests that market investigations would be a valuable addition to the 
Commission’s competition toolkit, in digital markets and more widely. However, given the 
limitations discussed above, in particular around the flexibility, monitoring and enforcement 
of remedies, they are unlikely to be a panacea for competition concerns in digital platforms. 
Indeed, at the conclusion of its market study in Online Platforms and Digital Advertising, the 
CMA decided not to commence a formal market investigation. It did so on the basis that the 
UK Government was likely to be introducing ex ante regulation in this area and that it would 
be preferable to intervene via that route so far as possible.  

16 Ibid, page 16. 

15 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
It is therefore to be welcomed that the Commission is also consulting on the potential for a 
new ex ante regulatory instrument for large digital platforms. But this leaves a residual 
question. In the context of digital platforms, would there be merit in the EU also introducing 
the New Competition Tool as a complement to such ex ante regulation? 

MIs in the context of regulation? 

The incremental value of MIs in the context of regulation will clearly depend on the powers 
to be incorporated within such any ex ante regulatory framework. Option 3 is the key option 
in the European Commission’s proposals, and it has two potential elements. Sub-option 3a 
would involve the ‘prohibition or restriction of certain unfair trading practices by large 
online platforms acting as gatekeepers (“blacklisted” practices)’. Sub-option 3b would 
enable the adoption of ‘tailor-made remedies addressed to large online platforms acting as 
gatekeepers on a case-by-case basis where necessary and justified’.  

While either type of intervention could potentially emerge from an MI, Sub-option 3b is 
clearly the more similar in that it would involve reviewing specific market issues and 
imposing proportionate tailored remedies. 

However, there are at least two substantive areas where there is a potential gap in the 
Commission’s proposals for ex ante regulation, and which could the New Competition Tool 
could usefully fill.  

The first relates to the power to impose structural interventions. These are apparently 
envisaged as a possible outcome in relation to the New Competition Tool, but are not 
mentioned in the consultation on ex ante regulation.  

As mentioned above, structural interventions have in fact been imposed only rarely in MIs. 
However, it is noteworthy that the CMA Online Platforms and Digital Advertising market 
study identified a serious conflict of interest associated with Google’s strong position at 
various levels in the advertising intermediation value chain. It concluded that the proposed 
UK regulator should have the power to introduce different forms of separation, from 
operational separation to full ownership separation. The CMA’s findings thus confirm that 
the power to impose structural remedies may well prove valuable but also highlight that this 
power could potentially be given to a regulator, rather than reserved for MIs.  

The second gap relates to the need for market-wide interventions to promote competition. 
It would clearly be possible to impose certain ex ante regulations symmetrically to all 
market participants, as indeed occurs under the EU Regulatory Framework for 
communications. However, the ex ante regulation instrument that is currently proposed 
would allow requirements to be placed only on the largest digital platforms. Since 
interventions will be best applied to all firms across a market, this may provide a valuable 
role for an MI.  

Market-wide interventions can be important even where there is a single firm with a 
dominant position. Consider the simple example of telephone number portability. This is 
now a standard element of telecommunications regulation, but it was first imposed in the 

16 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
UK in 1995, following an MI-like review. Making this a market-wide requirement, rather 
than simply imposing it on the incumbent supplier British Telecom, was important for giving 
consumers confidence that they could keep their phone number not only if they switched 
away from the incumbent but also if they later switched back.  

This was a situation where a market-wide intervention was required in order to open up 
competition to a strong incumbent supplier, but – as the discussion above highlights – 
market-wide interventions can also be valuable for enhancing competition when there are 
multiple players in a market. Indeed, number portability itself is today required in mobile 
telephony markets, where there are typically multiple players. It is important for facilitating 
the switching required for effective competition and it has been shown to have a substantial 
impact in reducing prices.17 The majority of the MI interventions in the Table 1 above were 
applied to multiple firms across the market, and designed to enhance competition generally 
rather than specifically to open up monopolised markets. 

As is emphasised in the Commission’s Inception Impact Assessment, market-wide 
interventions can also be valuable in preventing markets from tipping. Again, the 
telecommunications sector offers a useful example, with the rules around interconnection 
being valuable in ensuring a level playing field for competition that overcomes the tendency 
towards concentration that would otherwise exist. Consider an alternative world in which 
there were no ability to interconnect across mobile telephony networks. In that world, the 
natural consumer desire to access as wide a network of contacts as possible would likely 
result in the market tipping to monopoly.  

Thought experiment: The case of interoperability 

The complementary role that the two proposed tools might play can be considered through 
a thought experiment. Consider the thorny issue of interoperability. Like number portability, 
interoperability can be valuable both in opening up a monopolised market to competition 
and also in facilitating effective competition within a non-monopolised market. In the 
former case, it may potentially be sufficient to impose interoperability only on the 
monopoly firm, but in either case it may also be valuable to impose it more widely. 

Interoperability can also work to prevent currently non-monopolised digital markets from 
‘tipping’ to monopoly, for much the same reasons as interconnectivity in telecoms. This has 
an important implication: it may be valuable to impose interoperability at an early stage in 
the development of a market.18 A current example might be the market for self-driving cars, 
where such a requirement may be important for generating effective competition, and 
indeed maximising safety. 

Given these competition benefits of interoperability, there have been many demands that 
the digital platforms should make their systems interoperable. But what does this really 
mean? It presumably cannot mean that every element of their systems is made fully 

17 Park, M. (2011), The Economic Impact of Wireless Number Portability. Journal of Industrial Economics, 59: 
714-745. doi:10.1111/j.1467-6451.2011.00471.x 
18 Absent interoperability, multi-homing by users can have a similar effect, and it can equally be important to 
protect or promote that. 

17 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
interoperable; this would not be justified by the competition concerns, even if made sense 
as a concept. 

One could, however, imagine the following three-pronged regulatory approach being taken 
to interoperability, which would draw upon both the ex ante regulatory instrument and the 
New Competition Tool proposed by the Commission: 

1)  Under Option 3a of the proposed ex ante regulatory instrument: Blacklisted 

practices for designated major platforms such as: 

•  where a designated digital platform offers interoperability to one or more third 

parties, failing to offer the same functionality to all other third parties or doing so 
on a discriminatory basis; 

•  where a designated digital platform has previously provided interoperability to a 
third party, later withholding, withdrawing or deprecating this, where doing so 
would have an adverse effect on platform users; or 

• 

failure to ensure that the core technologies of any designated digital platform 
interoperate effectively with third party technologies, where this would bring 
user benefit. 

2)  Under Option 3b of the proposed ex ante regulatory instrument: Specific 

requirements on designated platforms to provide interoperability in relation to 
particular areas, designed to open up competition. An example might be a 
requirement on a designated social media platform to enable cross-posting, as 
proposed by the CMA in its Online Platforms and Digital Advertising market study. 

3)  Under the proposed New Competition Tool: Requirements for cross-market 

interoperability, which apply to all market participants, not just designated digital 
platforms. This may also require cross-industry coordination on standards and 
protocols, a process which can itself raise competition concerns and which may 
benefit from careful oversight.  

In theory, all of these interventions could be achieved through MIs. However, the issues of 
flexibility and monitoring described above mean that the design and enforcement of the 
first and second are likely to be better suited to the application of an ex ante regulatory 
framework.  

5.  A final word 

In 2002, the UK sent a delegation19 to DG Competition to present and promote the UK’s 
Market Investigation regime. They failed to convince their hosts of the advantage of this 
tool relative to standard competition law, and they were sent packing.  

19 The delegation included the author in her then role as Chief Economist at the Office of Fair Trading 

18 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
In the intervening 18 years, we have all learned a lot. The potential of MIs has been more 
thoroughly tested, while the limitations of standard competition law, and especially abuse 
of dominance provisions, have become more apparent. The Commission’s consultation on a 
New Competition Tool is therefore both welcome and timely. There are lessons to be drawn 
from the UK experience of MIs for the implementation of such a regime at EU level. For 
example, because the tool is potentially so powerful and flexible, it merits strong procedural 
checks and balances, to guard against confirmation bias or politicisation. At the same time, 
there is significant room for improvement within the current UK regime in relation to the 
powers around remedy flexibility and enforcement.   

Nonetheless, the UK experience also confirms that the New Competition Tool has the 
potential to be hugely helpful, both in the digital sphere and more widely. But the tool also 
has inherent limitations and thus should not be viewed as a full solution to the issues raised 
by digital platforms, but rather as a valuable complementary tool alongside new ex ante 
regulation. 

19 

 
 
 
