Instrat and European Horizons joint consultation for the 
European Commission’s Digital Services Act package 
(DSA) and the ex ante regulatory instrument. 

Instrat  and  European  Horizons  appreciate  the  opportunity  to  comment  on  the  European 
Commission’s Inception Impact Assessment regarding the development of Digital Services Act 
package (DSA).  

Instrat is a progressive think-tank focused on public policy advisory. We provide research and 
consult on digital economy, energy and environment, sustainable finance, labour market and 
inequalities.  We  act  in  the  public interest, in  our work  we  create  and  adapt  open  access  & 
open source tools.  

European Horizons is a global, student-led policy incubator committed to giving young people 
a voice in shaping the future of Europe and of transatlantic relations. Through our network of 
university  chapters  across  the  world,  and  in  collaboration  with  our  partner  organizations, 
European  Horizons  devises,  tests,  and  advocates  for  innovative  policy  ideas  to  advance 
European integration. 

Executive Summary: Digital Services Act 

●  Based on our argumentation below, we believe that the European Commission should 
adopt a comprehensive framework with the overarching goal of establishing a fair and 
competitive digital market environment, thus increasing innovation and securing digital 
rights for European citizens. 

●  To  level  the  playing  field,  it  is  necessary  to  rethink  the  fundamental  aspects  of  the 
digital  space  and  propose  bold  policy  actions,  such  as  defining  the  significant  digital 
presence, implementing interoperability through vertical separation of platform utilities 
(decoupling),  listing  prohibited  and  unfair  practices,  analyzing  social  and  economic 
impacts of algorithms, and strengthening data sharing. 

●  Proper enforcement of both GDPR and DSA requires enhanced reporting and intervening 
powers.  Therefore,  we  propose  a  new  European  regulatory  body  equipped  with  the 
mandate to supervise the European Digital Single Market. 

Instrat Foundation: jan.zygmuntowski@instrat.pl 
www.instrat.pl 

European Horizons: philipp.rombach@europeanhorizons.org 
www.europeanhorizons.org 

Document dated 8.09.2020  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
●  Consequently,  Instrat  and  European  Horizons  recommend  that  the  European 
Commission choose Option 3 in conjunction with Option 2: ex-ante regulation for large 
online platforms with significant network effects acting as gatekeepers, which includes 
a  horizontal  framework  empowering  regulators  to  collect  information  from  those 
platforms. 

Introduction 

Twenty years ago the European Union introduced the E-Commerce Directive. Since then, the 
internet  and  the  broader  digital  economy  have  undergone  a  revolution  which  dramatically 
altered market structures, business behaviors, and user vulnerability. In the early 2000s, digital 
markets were still highly fragmented and subject to dynamic fluxes, underlined by the dot-
com bubble. Since then, ICT has become a general purpose technology, affecting all sectors 
of  the  economy  and  also,  fundamentally,  the  fabric  of  our  societies.  The  growing  divide 
between  slow-moving  legislative  and  regulatory  bodies  and  fast-paced  technological 
innovation, combined with disruptive business models of the digital economy, have created an 
amalgamation of complex and interdependent problems. Of particular concern is the fact that 
European  citizens  are  increasingly  exposed  to  orchestrated  and  hostile  disinformation 
campaigns, in addition to being de facto powerless vis-a-vis online platforms and big tech in 
their claim for fulfillment of their human right to data privacy.  

Consequently, the European Digital Strategy is presently foremost, after the European Green 
Deal, on the European Commission’s policy agenda for a more integrated Europe.  

To  support  the  existing  European  Digital  Strategy,  the  above  mentioned  problems  must  be 
addressed through policy solutions and regulatory measures that will facilitate socially and 
economically beneficial development, both in the common internet and for the broader digital 
economy, all while deepening European integration. The European Single Market has helped 
transform  the  European  continent  into  a  global,  economic  heavyweight.  Therefore,  the 
European  Commission  must  implement  new  regulations  to  strengthen  interoperability 
between  online  platforms,  data  protection,  and  data  privacy,  and  to  counter  the  anti-
democratic  phenomena  of  hate-speech  and  disinformation,  in  a  fair,  robust,  and  intelligent 
manner. Only then can we hope to again witness the so-called Brussels effect: causing the 
world to follow where the European Commission leads.  

General remarks on the DSA 

The Digital Services Act package is a necessary step to build on the recently introduced General 
Data  Protection  Regulation  and  to  help  match  European  legislation  with  the  reality  of  the 

Instrat Foundation: jan.zygmuntowski@instrat.pl 
www.instrat.pl 

European Horizons: philipp.rombach@europeanhorizons.org 
www.europeanhorizons.org 

Document dated 8.09.2020  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
digital economy in the 21st century. The E-Commerce Directive adopted in 2000 has become 
outdated and is in urgent need of replacement by a more functional and pragmatic legislative 
package. The Rome I Regulation and the Brussels Regime are directives introduced to govern 
the  choice  of  law  and  apply  to  contractual  obligations.    Yet  they  both  fall  short  of  fully 
addressing conflicts related to consumer protection in digital markets. To illustrate, in 2015 
only one in ten consumers experiencing problems in the digital market received remedies. The 
respective losses in welfare are estimated to be in the range of €9-11bn. 

Since its inception, the Digital Single Market was expected to facilitate open digital borders, 
boost e-commerce and retail, and create the conditions for a thriving data economy. Due to 
the  peculiarities  of  the  digital  environment,  the  European  Digital  Single  Market  increasingly 
suffers  from  market  concentration  and  deterioration  of  competition.  The  rise  of  dominant 
online  platforms,  which  leverage  large  network  and  scale  effects  to  turn  themselves  into 
gatekeepers,  is  economically  and  socially  harmful.  The  already  strong  market  position  of 
gatekeepers is amplified by SMEs increasingly facing walled gardens. These small and medium 
enterprises cannot match the sheer scale of data accessible to dominant online platforms and 
thus risk being pushed out of business. Such structural risks for competition are empirically 
known  to  foster  decreasing  research  and  development  spending  and,  ultimately,  stall 
innovation in the European Digital Single Market.  

Significant digital presence 

For the European Commission to effectively implement the new policies collected under the 
umbrella of the DSA package, it first needs to lay out a precise and robust definition of what 
constitutes a significant digital presence. Due to the characteristics of the digital market, we 
recommend  the  European  Commission  differentiate  between  the  applicable  thresholds 
attributable to the European Digital Single Market: platform revenues; number of users; and 
number of business contracts.  

It is further important to apply a broader scope to the definition of significant digital presence 
by  considering  multifaceted  online  platforms.  Only  then  can  regulation  consider  online 
platforms which incorporate operating systems, multiple applications, application stores, and 
marketplaces.  Online  platforms  below  a  pre-defined  qualifying  threshold  for  a  significant 
digital presence will be exempt from remedies aimed at the largest gatekeepers specifically, 
thus  this  document  uses  the  term online platform when  referring  to  gatekeeper  platforms 
with significant digital presence. 

Although the issue of corporate taxation lies clearly outside of the scope of this consultation, 
we want to emphasize that the concept of a significant digital presence was launched and 
introduced as a pre-requirement for a subsequent digital services tax applied to the European 
Digital Single Market. Particularly in light of the stalled OECD talks, we identify the need for 

Instrat Foundation: jan.zygmuntowski@instrat.pl 
www.instrat.pl 

European Horizons: philipp.rombach@europeanhorizons.org 
www.europeanhorizons.org 

Document dated 8.09.2020  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the European Commission to pursue the concept of a digital services tax, ideally implemented 
through the Digital Services Act package. 

Interoperability and platform utilities 

One  of  the  core  features  of  open  and  accessible  digital  markets  is  the  prevalence  of 
interoperable standards and protocols, which allow not just for low market entry barriers but 
also for improved user friendliness. The importance of interoperability was well-understood 
since HTTP and e-mail protocols facilitated the rise of first generation online platforms. The 
new  generation  of  online  platforms  and  hardware  operating  systems,  however,  are 
characterized  by  reduced  interoperability.  Unchecked  by  regulatory  authorities  these  online 
platforms  leverage  network  effects  to  build  artificial  and  shielded  platform-specific 
ecosystems. In other words, a lack of interoperability is utilized to decrease competition by 
heightened entry barriers, effectively boosting market dominance. 

Despite its peculiarities, the digital market is not the sole market affected by network effects 
and  large  userbases.  Other  sectors  characterized  by  natural  monopolies  are  transmission 
system operators, telecommunication, railway, or pharma. In order to avoid monopolization, 
economic inefficiencies, and welfare losses, regulators need to step in to introduce fair and 
transparent  rules  governing  the  market.  For  many  markets,  the  European  Commission  has 
already  wisely  established  regulatory  legislation.  Since  the  three  liberalization  packages  for 
the (horizontal) integration of European energy markets, competition in the market has thrived 
and ultimately helped facilitate the emergence of renewable energy. A more recent, though no 
less impactful, European policy measure is the Payment Services Directive, PSD2, addressing 
fairness and transparency in the banking and financial system.  

In general, most regulatory frameworks which foster infrastructure interoperability entail: 

1)  the decoupling of the underlying network infrastructure from business operations and 
provisioning of services (i.e. technical hardware and basic operating software); and 
2)  the enforcement of interoperability on infrastructure operators and a broad regulatory 

regime on service providers. 

We  recommend  implementing  the  very  same  remedies  in  the  digital  market.  Specifically, 
decoupling of the digital market to establish a digital infrastructure of databases, metadata, 
standards, and protocols used by online platforms. Secondly, enforcement of interoperability 
between platform utility operators and businesses providing goods and services in an over-
the-top  manner.  Minimum  interoperability  requirements  should  be  introduced  to  allow 
competing  applications  and  SME  software  solutions  to  simply  plug  into  larger  platform 
systems via standardized communication protocols and programmable database interfaces. If 
certain  online  platforms  consequently  failed  to  comply  with  these  new  interoperability 

Instrat Foundation: jan.zygmuntowski@instrat.pl 
www.instrat.pl 

European Horizons: philipp.rombach@europeanhorizons.org 
www.europeanhorizons.org 

Document dated 8.09.2020  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
requirements,  regulatory  authorities  should  apply  remedies  on  the  basis  of  unfair  trading 
practices and violation of European law.  

Denylists for unfair trading practices 

Because  of  the  slower  pace  of  regulatory  legislation,  today’s  gatekeeping  online  platforms 
engage in a blurry legal gray zone by relying on unfair market behavior. Therefore, the European 
Commission’s proposal to establish prohibited unfair trading practices should not be perceived 
as a radical step but as a long-awaited correction of pre-existing legal loopholes. The special 
characteristic of digital markets requires legislation which addresses structural competition 
problems ex ante and not, as so far, ex post. We are convinced that market regulation is more 
effective when it is not an emergency intervention but is rather of a preventive nature. In order 
to  pursue  such  a  prevention-driven  approach  several  unfair  trading  practices  should  be 
included in new digital market denylists:  

●  Cross-financing and cross-subsidizing of otherwise unprofitable subsidiary companies 
as a strategy to gain market power in adjacent markets (with Amazon Web Services or 
Google  being  good  examples  of  powerful  subsidiaries  acting  as  cash  cows  for  other 
subsidiaries)  

●  Data transfer or database merging between subsidiary companies without implicit and 
optional consent of consumers and users (with data transfer between WhatsApp and 
Facebook being a prime example) 

●  Self-preferencing  in  search  results  of  any  product  or  service  that  is  economically 
connected (e.g. when Apple sells apps through its app-store which compete with third 
party software sold via the same app-store) 

●  Forcing users to accept data sharing, disclosure of private data, or downloads of cookies 

if they aim to access the respective webpage or digital service 

●  Forcing other platforms and apps into a self-preferred payment method 
●  Bundling and tying sales of digital services and software and hardware 

Enhanced GDPR enforcement 

When the European Commission introduced the General Data Protection Regulation, GDPR, it 
ventured to protect the most fundamental rights of data subjects. The DSA package is not just 
a further regulation of the digital market but also the chance to correct shortcomings of the 
GDPR and to double-down on promising provisions. We reiterate the urgent need for users to 
have  access  to  effective  and  transparent  data  management  tools  which  support  data 
portability as outlined in Article 20 GDPR. In addition, users were given the right to request 
that platform administrators share the stored user data, yet many individual users faced non-

Instrat Foundation: jan.zygmuntowski@instrat.pl 
www.instrat.pl 

European Horizons: philipp.rombach@europeanhorizons.org 
www.europeanhorizons.org 

Document dated 8.09.2020  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
responsive  administrators.  While  users  currently  have  the  legal  right  to  demand  digital 
platforms to disclose what personal data has been stored, users cannot require information 
about how a digital platform has processed personal user data. In addition to merely requiring 
online  platforms  to  follow  requests  for  disclosure  of  collected  and  processed  user  data, 
enhanced  GDPR  enforcement  should  also  lead  to  disclosure  of  the  economic  value  of  user 
data as online platforms earn huge profits by applying data processing algorithms. By pursuing 
this approach, the European Commission would build on the official staff working documents 
on  the  Guidance on the Implementation/Application of Directive 2005/29/EC on Unfair 
Commercial Practices  and  court  rulings  lamenting  the  practice  by  online  platforms  of 
obscuring the true cost of service.  

We  appreciate  that  the  European  Commission  pursued  a  path  of  increased  focus  on  data 
protection in recent years. Yet we need to stress the importance of effective policy solutions 
and regulations requiring third parties to meet European data protection standards. The recent 
Schrems II verdict demonstrated well that existing agreements, such as the EU-U.S. Privacy 
Shield Framework, cannot  guarantee  protection  of  European  data  subjects  at  this  point  in 
time. Particularly U.S. surveillance programs failed to meet the legal requirements as outlined 
in Article 52 of the EU Charter on Fundamental Rights. This is of particular concern, as more 
than 5,000 companies contributing to a €6trn transatlantic economic partnership relied on the 
functioning of the Privacy Shield. We recommend the European Commission fully leverage the 
effectiveness of the upcoming DSA package and work towards a new agreement to protect 
European  data  subjects  in  order  to  uphold  the  principle  of  effective  judicial  protection  of 
Community law. 

Data sharing and governance 

When large online platforms extract data and the vast associated economic value, it weakens 
the  competitiveness  in  and  of  the  European  Digital  Single  Market  and  favors  commercial 
interests  over  social  welfare.  One  could  argue  that  by  leaving  such  practices  unchecked, 
Europe is massively investing abroad by providing (mostly) free data. Thus, we identified an 
urgent  need  to  build  trusted  institutions  and  to  strengthen  data  sharing.  Effective  data 
portability requires a competitive end-point to move data to. In order to provide a competitive 
platform utility infrastructure, a trusted data sharing space is the minimum requirement that 
the European Commission should encourage. We recommend that the DSA package grants the 
minimum possibility of moving data to personal pods in the European Common Data Space. 
There, data could be further managed in compliance with GDPR and other data governance 
needs  of  any  individual  or  business.  Data  sharing  should  be  encouraged  via  trusted 
intermediaries, which ensure interoperability and may restrict access to subjects violating data 
sharing terms and conditions. The Common European Data Space is well-positioned to pioneer 
trusted multi-stakeholder data governance. We recognize that investments in cloud computing 

Instrat Foundation: jan.zygmuntowski@instrat.pl 
www.instrat.pl 

European Horizons: philipp.rombach@europeanhorizons.org 
www.europeanhorizons.org 

Document dated 8.09.2020  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
across the European Union, as outlined in the European Digital Strategy, are well-aligned with 
the presented policy proposal.  

Algorithmic Impact Assessments for social and economic issues 

Online  platforms  are  obligated  to  perform  Algorithmic  Impact  Assessment  tests  for  high-
impact  algorithms  on  socio-economic  activities.  This  approach  extends  the  high-risk 
requirements as outlined in the European Commission’s White Paper on Artificial Intelligence. 
When online platforms with a significant digital presence change algorithms (such as search 
engine algorithms), it can lead to unintended consequences on digital markets. Therefore, the 
European  Commission  should  make  AIA  tests  mandatory  for  all  algorithm  changes  by 
gatekeepers. The AIA test should measure the following:  

●  Purpose and outcomes of the algorithm change 
●  Key variables and parameters as well as sourcing of data 
●  Technical parameters (including loss function, fairness, and performance) 
●  Harm caused to users (individual and SMEs) 

AIA tests should be performed under a licensing regime. Auditing and testing by a European 
regulator and mandated research institutes should be a precondition for a change and release 
of  algorithm  changes.  The  main  outcomes  of  Algorithmic  Impact  Assessments  should  be 
accessible to the wider public via digital leaflets (similar to practices in the pharmaceutical 
sector) and need to be in accordance with the explainable AI principle. 

Supervision, data collection, and enforcement 

Online  platforms  should  be  obliged  to  report  to  national  authorities  and,  ideally,  a  new 
European  regulator,  in  order  to  achieve  greater  digital  market  transparency.  Reported  data 
should include, but not be restricted to, social media usage, advertisement sales, e-commerce, 
and chosen high-impact sectors of social and economic activity, such as the housing market. 
Regular reporting should take place via a dedicated application programming interface. Due to 
the  digital  market’s  unique  characteristics,  regular  reporting  will  not  require  complex 
bureaucratic procedures and will be almost costless, as online platforms already monitor user 
activity data. Thus, successful implementation will only be a matter of introducing a proper 
automatic supervision framework.  

We  believe  that  the  successful  implementation  and  enforcement  of  a  new  regulatory 
framework for the European Digital Single Market requires the creation of a new regulatory 

Instrat Foundation: jan.zygmuntowski@instrat.pl 
www.instrat.pl 

European Horizons: philipp.rombach@europeanhorizons.org 
www.europeanhorizons.org 

Document dated 8.09.2020  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
authority on the supranational level. This regulatory body should oversee, but not be restricted 
to, the following: 

●  Supervising the implementation and enforcement of the DSA package and of additional 
digital market legislation, such as the GDPR or the introduction of a digital services tax. 

●  Setting common European standards for reporting and interoperability. 
●  Collecting  data  and  aiding  Member  States  in  accessing  data  for  effective  national 

policymaking. 

●  Monitoring the digital market, competition, and openness of the internet. 

Recommendation  

Taking the above into account, Instrat and European Horizons recommend that the European 
Commission choose Option 3 in conjunction with Option 2: ex-ante regulation for large online 
platforms with significant network effects acting as gatekeepers, which includes a horizontal 
framework empowering regulators to collect information from those platforms.  

The  current  E-Commerce  Directive  and  competition  frameworks  fell  short  of  addressing 
changed digital environments effectively. To counter both the existence and the emergence of 
market  concentration  and  large  online  platforms  acting  as  gatekeepers,  the  European 
Commission should deploy ex ante tools which will prevent market dominance and abusive 
behaviors. We recommend the European Commission to implement the extended version of 
Option 3 to include denylists and tailor-made remedies. Option 3 should be combined with 
the transparency obligations derived from Option 2.  

If  the  DSA  package  is  to  achieve  the  policy  objectives  presented  in  the  Inception  Impact 
Assessment,  the  European  Commission  should  introduce  a  strong  regulator  equipped  with 
bold ex ante instruments countering gatekeepers and unfair competition advantages arising 
from network effects. The new regulatory body should be additionally empowered to actively 
monitor the market and to conduct market audits via Algorithmic Impact Assessments. The 
European Commission would thus safeguard long-term competitiveness and innovation in a 
fair digital environment respecting our shared democratic, liberal values and the rule of law, 
all while facilitating social and economic welfare.  

We thus believe that the DSA should facilitate the transformation of the internet towards an 
open, transparent, fair, and interoperable public space, which fosters the freedom of speech, 
boosts innovation, and minimizes the spread of harmful content. 

Instrat Foundation: jan.zygmuntowski@instrat.pl 
www.instrat.pl 

European Horizons: philipp.rombach@europeanhorizons.org 
www.europeanhorizons.org 

Document dated 8.09.2020  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
