Ref. Ares(2020)4722932 - 09/09/2020

EU DIGITAL SERVICES ACT & NEW COMPETITION TOOL – 
ENSURING A FAIR AND HARMONISED DIGITAL SINGLE MARKET 

SEPTEMBER 2020  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
I. ABOUT MVNO EUROPE 

MVNO  Europe  represents  various  types  of  Mobile  Virtual  Network  Operators  (MVNOs),  with  different 
business models, addressing retail consumers, business users, the public sector, and Internet of Things (IoT). 
http://www.mvnoeurope.eu/members 

MVNOs target various customer segments (e.g. young people, businesses, IoT, etc) and provide innovative 
services that make them particularly sensitive to an optimal experience with handsets.  

MVNOs in the EU represent +/- 10% of SIM cards. Their market share is higher in some European markets, 
reaching around 25% of all SIM cards in the Netherlands, and is stable or growing in key European countries, 
as reflected by the French, British, German and Italian examples where MVNOs have millions of customers. 

MVNOs strongly contribute to competition and provide clear Business to Consumer (B2C) and Business to 
Business (B2B) end-user benefits. MVNOs also contribute to financing mobile networks through payment of 
wholesale charges which assure revenues to Mobile Network Operators, whilst avoiding costly duplication 
of network assets. 

II.COMMERCIAL  PRACTICES  DIMINISHING  COMPETITION, 

INNOVATION  AND 

CUSTOMER SATISFACTION 

Like other telecommunications operators, MVNOs’ business model is primarily based on the provision of 
internet 
bundles  of  voice/SMS/data  services.  Nowadays,  customers  expect  uninterrupted  mobile 
connectivity  so  as  to    access  the  full  range  of  functionalities  –  including  navigation,  music  and  video 
streaming, text/voice/video messaging, mobile hotspot capability, and so on and so forth – that are available 
on their mobile device. Indeed, time spent on the Internet worldwide via mobile devices reached 79% in 
20181. 

For many years now, MVNOs have been encountering major obstacles preventing them from fulfilling their 
mission of providing their customers with the most flawless experience possible and of boosting competition 
in the telecommunications sector2. Some MVNOs’ customers have faced technical issues primarily relating 
to the setting of various functionalities – such as the activation of mobile Internet, MMS, mobile hotspot 
and  other  messaging  services  –  on  their  smartphone,  being  left  with  dysfunctions  and/or  compelled  to 
manually  configure  those  features  themselves,  often  with  disappointing  results.  Worse  still,  MVNOs  are 
sometimes totally blocked and unable to even use some services such as Voice over LTE (VoLTE) or VoWifi 
(VoWifi).  This  means  that  millions  of  end-users  are  potentially  paying  important  amounts  of  money  for 
buying expensive devices that cannot be used to their full potential.  

The  above-mentioned  obstacles  originate  from  the  commercial  practices  of  some  major  handset 
manufacturers  who  deliberately  limit  the  openness  and  interoperability  of  their  operating  system  with 
certain mobile operators3. Structurally reluctant to cooperate towards finding mutually beneficial solutions4, 
those handset manufacturers make the (proper) functioning of their operating system conditional upon the 
signature  of  a  carrier  partner  agreement,  which  can  include  device  distribution  and  promotion 
commitments.  MVNOs,  and probably  some  smaller  Mobile  Network Operators  as well, experience  these 

1 Study Mobile Advertising Forecasts, Zenith 
2 This trend has been confirmed by the report ‘Market study into mobile app stores’ published by the 
Netherlands Authority for Consumers and Markets, in April 2019, p. 6 
3 This is further substantiated by the report ‘Market study into mobile app stores’ published by the Netherlands 
Authority for Consumers and Markets, in April 2019, p. 81 
4 This is confirmed by the report ‘Market study into mobile app stores’ published by the Netherlands Authority 
for Consumers and Markets in April 2019, p. 6 

MVNO Europe l Rue de la Loi, 38 l mvnoeurope.eu l +32 2 789 66 23 l info@mvnoeurope.eu 

2 

 
 
requirements  as  one-sided  and  financially  and  commercially  unsustainable/unrealistic.  This  type  of 
behaviour hampers innovation and prevents MVNOs from offering essential and innovative services (such 
as VoLTE and VoWiFi communications or eSIM)5 as they would like to their customers. 

MVNO Europe has always been of the view that all operators – with or without “handset carrier partner 
agreements” – should be able to equally access and support features offered by operating systems/handset 
manufacturers, in the interest of users (be they consumers or business/public sector users).  

III. COMPETITION AND FREEDOM OF CHOICE DAMAGED 

The technical problems that smaller operators have to face because of the abovementioned commercial 
practices of some handset manufacturers constitute a structural competitive disadvantage, hampering new 
entrants  on  telecommunications  and  digital  services markets  and entailing  risks  of  evicting  MVNOs  from 
certain (especially high-end) market segments. Such a situation is highly-detrimental to MVNOs’ end-users 
and is not acceptable in a genuine and open digital single market.  

EU policy aims to provide everyone in Europe with better quality goods and services at lower prices and is 
about applying rules to make sure companies fairly compete with each other and are encouraged to innovate 
for the benefit of consumers, business and public sector users. MVNO Europe is of the view that those goals 
should  be  pursued  and  respected  by  all  companies  active  in  the  EU,  including  for  the  services  provided 
through software/hardware combinations and especially the operating systems on devices.  

The  technical  problems  endured  by  MVNOs’  customers  clearly  show  that  devices  and  their  embedded 
operating systems may challenge the general objective of an open Internet in terms of how end-users can 
(or  rather  cannot)  practically  access  and  use  Internet  services  on  their  devices.  Acting  as  gate-keepers, 
operating  system  providers  are  able  to  obstruct  the  chain  that  connects  end-users  to  Internet  content, 
information, services and applications. This is not only worrying from the perspective of the open Internet 
but also from a freedom of choice perspective as choices are being made for the end-user him/her/itself. 
Indeed, if the end-user is to make full use of the mobile device of his/her/its choice and its functionalities, 
he/she/it may be forced to subscribe to telecommunications services that are provided by a mobile operator 
certified  by  the  handset  manufacturer  –  and  thereby  potentially  turn  down  his/her/its  initial  preferred 
choice of mobile services provider.  

IV. DEVICE NEUTRALITY AS THE WAY FORWARD 

The European Commission has indicated in its communication “Shaping Europe’s Digital Future” that it will 
explore  ex-ante  rules  to  ensure  that  markets  characterised  by  large  platforms  with  significant  network 
effects  acting  as  gate-keepers,  remain  fair  and  contestable  for  innovators,  businesses,  and  new  market 
entrants in the context of the Digital Services Act (DSA) package.  

MVNO Europe is of the view that, like the Regulation on platform-to-business relations6, such a package has 
the  capability  to  deal  with  –  among  other  things  –  the  issues  related  to  devices,  operating  systems  and 
Internet access that are described above, including where competition between electronic communications 
providers is distorted by the behaviour of device manufacturers and operating systems in phones, tablets, 
wearable devices, in-car systems, and other future devices.   

5 VoLTE is nowadays a must have functionality to ensure voice services for the mid and long term, especially 
considering that MNOs will be gradually decommissioning 3G as from 2021. 
6 The results of the inter-institutional negotiations on this P2B Regulation failed to address the existing 
imbalances in the relationships between providers of operating systems and their business users. 

MVNO Europe l Rue de la Loi, 38 l mvnoeurope.eu l +32 2 789 66 23 l info@mvnoeurope.eu 

3 

 
 
Indeed, MVNO Europe considers that the DSA can provide end-users with improved freedom of choice by 
obliging  certain  big  players  to  stop  market-distorting  behaviour  and  allow  for  more  competitive  market 
dynamics.  

The European Commission should be able to reach those goals by integrating the notion of device neutrality 
within  its  proposal,  which  is  a  principle  that  European  consumer  organisations7  and  some  national 
regulators8 would also like to be applied within the European Union and which aims to give end-users control 
over their devices and guarantee access to the open internet in all parts of the value chain. “Device neutrality 
extends  the  principle  of  net  neutrality  to  guarantee  that,  like  your  telecoms  operator,  a  platform  cannot 
interfere with your decisions by restricting your freedom of choice”9.  

As far as MVNO Europe is concerned, the following should apply if device neutrality is to make the market 
fairer and more competitive:  

-  Whether they are smartphones, tablets, smart speakers, voice assistants, wearable devices or any 
other  connected  devices,  consumers  must  be  able  to  use  their  devices  in  a  neutral  and  non-
discriminatory way10. 
Inescapable device manufacturers should not, merely for business reasons, deliberately degrade 
the selection of content and services available on their own devices, by preventing providers from 
accessing the functions they need to fully operate their services11. 

- 

-  Device manufacturers and providers of operating systems should not be able to impose restrictions 
on mobile operators’ customers and  app developers to limit access to key device functionalities 
(e.g. mobile Internet, GPS or voice commands) for purely commercial reasons.  

-  Operating  systems  developed  for  connected  devices  should  be  interoperable  with  the  services 
provided  by  all  mobile  (virtual)  network  operators.  End-users  should  have  the  right/ability  to 
smoothly  access  all  the  functionalities  of  a  given  operating  system  (i.e.  features  are  properly 
working and do not require complicated manual configuration by the end-user) regardless of the 
choice  they  made  for  their  mobile  operator/telecommunications  services.  This  interoperability 
should not be subject to any type of commercial agreement dictated by the hardware/operating 
system provider. 
To  improve  the  overall  information  available  on  how  device  manufacturers  and  OS  providers 
operate, the European Commission as well as an expert regulator may be given the power to gather 
general information from all market players12. 
The  ability  for affected market participants  and end users  to  file dispute-resolution  proceedings 
with the European Commission and/or an expert regulatory authority would be most welcome.  

- 

- 

Finally, MVNO Europe is of the view that the New Competition Tool envisaged by the European Commission 
can  also  contribute  to  address  the  problems  described  above  by  further  allowing  for  the  supervision  of 
companies owning/controlling the main Operating Systems and, when needed, swift intervention to restore 
competition on the market. 

7 An EU that keeps working for Consumers - BEUC proposals for the 2019-2024 European Commission, BEUC 
p. 18 
8 The state of the internet in France - 2019 Report, ARCEP & ‘Market study into mobile app stores- April 
2019”,  ACM, p. 8. 
9 The state of the internet in France - 2019 Report, ARCEP. p. 64 
10 The state of the internet in France - 2019 Report, ARCEP. p. 65 
11 Open Internet and devices - Devices, the weak link in achieving an open internet (February 2018), ARCEP. 
p.56. 
12 Open Internet and devices - Devices, the weak link in achieving an open internet (February 2018), ARCEP. p. 
47. 

MVNO Europe l Rue de la Loi, 38 l mvnoeurope.eu l +32 2 789 66 23 l info@mvnoeurope.eu 

4 

 
 
 
 
V. CONTACT US 

MVNO Europe represents the interests of Mobile Virtual Network Operators active on European mobile and 
Internet  of  Things  markets,  and  that  have  negotiated  wholesale  access  to  the  networks  of  host  Mobile 
Network  Operators  (MNOs).  MVNO  Europe  gathers  various  type  of  business  models  addressing  retail 
consumers, business users, the public sector, machine-to-machine (M2M) and Internet of Things (IoT). The 
goal of MVNO Europe is to create a more openly accessible market for all MVNOs so that they can better 
contribute to the growth of the mobile communications sector, further ensure that consumers as well as 
business users have a wider range of diversified services to choose from and to, finally, boost competition 
on the retail mobile market to their benefit. Our members are convinced that MVNOs stimulate innovation 
in the telecom sector.  

MVNO Europe 
Rue de le Loi, 38 
B-1000 Brussels 
Belgium 
info@mvnoeurope.eu 

Quentin Philippart de Foy 
Policy Officer 
T +32 2 789 66 23 
quentin@mvnoeurope.eu 

Reza Moemen 
Policy Officer 
T +32 2 897 00 41 
reza@mvnoeurope.eu 

MVNO Europe l Rue de la Loi, 38 l mvnoeurope.eu l +32 2 789 66 23 l info@mvnoeurope.eu 

5 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
