Ref. Ares(2020)4690312 - 08/09/2020

To:  

European Commission 
Directorate-General for Competition 
Unit A.1 Antitrust Case Support and Policy 

Ref.nr.: 
Subject: 

HT.5849 
Necessity of new competition tooling to improve digital economy 

Dear madam/sir, 

Please allow us to shortly introduce ourselves. We represent several national CIO-
associations. Communities of Chief Information Officers (CIO’s) and other senior leaders that 
are responsible for digital technologies and digital transformations within private or public 
organizations. These organizations are all users of digital technologies. We don’t represent 
ICT suppliers and consultants.  

In the current reality of very drastic measures adopted to combat the COVID-19 virus, we are 
seeing the huge potential of digital technologies. These technologies help us sustain 
organizations that without them, would have to be closed down completely. Suppliers in 
digital infrastructures, services and devices have become vital to keeping society and the 
economy going to the largest extent possible, while people are staying at home as much as 
possible to prevent the further spreading of the virus. And while the current situation proves 
to all parties that digital technologies are here to stay and will become even more important 
in the future, this also proves how important it is to address the negative sides of the 
dominance of a limited group of suppliers, and to prevent abuse of their dominant position. 
The organizations that we represent, both private and public, are increasingly confronted 
with undesirable behaviour and sometimes even unfair practices of (large) software vendors 
and cloud providers. And although the scale differs, companies of all sizes face the same 
issues. 

The purpose of this letter is to address several such issues that will hamper the future digital 
economic growth in Europe if we continue on the current path. New ways of looking at the 
competition situation in markets for digital technologies are needed, as they are in some 
ways different from traditional markets. And new instruments or tools for regulating these 
markets are necessary where they do not provide for a fair interaction between supply and 
demand side agents. Below we will illustrate some of the situations our members encounter 
on the markets for digital technologies, including markets for software, hardware, cloud and 
other services.  

Specific aspects of digital technology markets that make them different from many other 
markets, either by these aspects on their own, or in combination: 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- 

In many cases, the complexity of contract and license conditions is such that a 
customer does not have an equal negotiating position vis-à-vis the supplier without 
hiring external expertise. A supplier only needs to know his own complex contracts, 
the customer those of many suppliers.  

-  Unilateral changes to agreements, terms and conditions by suppliers, for example 

introducing a different method of determining use. This usually leads to higher costs 
for the user, without added benefits. 

-  Re-bundling of applications by suppliers, which means that additional licenses must 
be purchased by the customer in order to continue to use the same applications 
he/she acquired and used before. 

-  This means that non-compliance and associated claims often occur and are an 

opportunity for the supplier to put the customer under pressure to purchase more 
licenses or other products/services from the same supplier in order to broaden (in 
range of products and services) and extend (in time) the relationship with / 
dependency of the customer. This seems to be a consciously pursued business case 
for the suppliers. 
It is virtually impossible to include any form of product / service liability of the 
supplier in contracts, while the potential risks for the customer are very large if the 
digital technology fails or proves unsafe (for instance cybersecurity risks). 
-  Data from customers and about the customer’s use of products and services is 

- 

appropriated and used by suppliers. Costs for getting your own data out of the cloud 
are often very high (higher than sending data into the cloud) and the supplier doesn’t 
always cooperate. 

-  Compliance with legal obligations should be a precondition to being allowed to enter 
the European market, where in the software market we see that it is often necessary 
to negotiate this into contracts. 

-  Due to the economies of scale and network advantages of software, the pressure 

from some suppliers to adapt software to the specific situation of a customer and the 
limited interoperability between software from different suppliers for the same 
application, the choice of a supplier for one application in part of the organization is 
in most cases a prelude to wider use of products and services of the same 
application.  

-  The costs associated with switching to another system or supplier (new licenses, new 
implementation, training employees, conversion of data / algorithms, starting over 
with training / learning from AI systems, etc.) are very large and therefore reinforce 
the dependency on suppliers that have in the past been contracted.  

-  These switching costs increase the longer a system/product/service is used, as more 

data/knowledge/value is created that has to be redone with a new 
system/product/service. 

-  The major suppliers are that large and have such dominance, that even the large 
non-IT enterprises or large governmental customers have hardly any negotiating 
power.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
-  Almost any new competitor offering interesting alternatives to products and services 
offered by incumbent large suppliers, is soon bought by one of these incumbents, 
which further reduces alternatives open to customers. It is almost impossible, due to 
the very large resources and huge amount of data available to them, to resist these 
incumbent suppliers. 

These aspects lead to the following situations that are from our point of view unwelcome, 
unfair or even unlawful and need to be addressed. 

-  Vendor lock-in 

⋅  Once a software vendor or cloud provider has been selected, fair competition 
is at stake. Switching to another vendor will impact business severely and 
change cost are extremely high, as indicated above. This results in one sided 
price increases and terms & conditions changes by vendors. And if our 
companies or organizations change from one software vendor to another, it is 
hard for them to get their data back at a reasonable cost.  

-  Undesirable and possibly unfair behaviour 

⋅ 

It is very difficult to comply with non-transparent and complex software 
licensing schemes, which leads to unintended non-compliance, and large 
claims. These claims are subsequently used to push the user into buying more 
software than they need, of a type that the vendor is trying to increase its 
market share in. We see this unwanted behaviour started at the larger 
software vendors, but more and more suppliers are copying this approach. 

- 

Insufficiency of current competition rules 

⋅  Current competition rules (i.a. articles 101 and 102 of the Treaty on the 
Functioning of the European Union) apply predominantly to competition 
between suppliers. They don’t very well apply to situations where a supplier 
has been chosen by a customer and the customer subsequently finds that the 
supplier is displaying undesirable and possibly unfair behaviour, while the 
options available to redress this are unavailable. 

What’s needed is a broader scope and new tooling for authorities to better understand and 
redress unfair and unwanted behaviour by dominant actors in the digital technology 
markets.  

-  The European Commission should not only look at competition between suppliers, 
but also at supplier behaviour after the choice of supplier / solution has been made 
and the agreements have been signed. There, the EC should (be able to) act in the 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
same way against a supplier who abuses his / her power vis-à-vis a customer as it 
would against a monopolist who abuses his / her power vis-à-vis a competitor.  

- 

In addition, research would be desirable into the extent to which customers actually 
have an influence on the contract conditions, or whether suppliers can simply push 
through their conditions. That could be an indication of abuse of power. 

-  The European Commission should have a much better understanding of the 

implications for customers when researching and ruling on proposed mergers and 
acquisitions of/by digital technology suppliers. 

- 

Interoperability between digital technology solutions and flexibility in the movement 
of data – including meta data - to and from locations/providers/solutions by the 
owner should be more stringently imposed. If this is not possible by standardization 
or negotiation and agreement between the data owner and the technology 
provider(s), it should be made mandatory in regulations. 

If you are interested in setting up a meeting to further address these issues, please contact 
mrs. Danielle Jacobs, CEO at Beltug, who’ll act as point of contact for all our associations.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
