Ref. Ares(2020)4722019 - 09/09/2020

General considerations about a new EU competition tool 
strengthen competition enforcement 

This consultation offers a valuable opportunity to provide views on whether there is a need for 
a new competition tool to ensure fair and competitive markets with a view to delivering lower 
prices and higher quality, as well as more choice and innovation to European consumers.  

In the context of accelerated digitalization in the maritime sector, the creation of a new market 
investigation  tool  aimed  at  addressing  structural  competition  problems  across  markets  is 
necessary. There is a compelling need to finally find a concrete response to the the recent 
developments in the area of Big Data and BI&A systems, and their potential anti-competitive 
effects in the market of containerized liner shipping services. 

Over  the  last  decade,  the  maritime  sector  has  been  subject  to  major  transformations, 
especially due to the ever-rising use of business intelligence and analytics (BI&A) systems, 
which  store  and  process  Big  Data.  This  technology  has  led  container  and  logistic  services 
revisit their strategic and commercial policies.  

Big data and its application in the maritime sector 

Big  data  is  the  term  used  to  indicate  the  large  volume  of  data  –  both  structured  and 
unstructured – that is generated in our personal and professional lives. The analysis of this 
big data is extremely useful as it allows businesses to monitor and make the best use of market 
trends and other useful information in real time. 

Traditional technology has been serving organizations’ analytics needs for decades, allowing 
them to analyse large data sets from traditional sources such as warehousing and distribution 
systems.  

Big data has now the potential to transform the maritime sector by creating new opportunities 
to drive innovation and deliver tangible operational efficiencies across the maritime logistics 
chain.  

For the past few years, most industries have been leveraging the power of Big data to increase 
their pace of innovation and efficiency.  

The  advent  of  Big  Data  and  the  consequent  widespread  use  of  BI&A  systems  have 
encouraged numerous shipping lines to revise their commercial strategies and turn to global 
end-to-end  services.1  The  use  of  the  BI&A  systems  will  allow  for  the  control  of  the  entire 
logistics  chain  of  these  services  and,  where  possible,  will  protect  these  systems  and  their 
improvements  by  IP  rights.  For  this  same  purpose,  Maersk  and  IBM  have  entered  a  joint 
venture creating TradeLens, a company owned 51% by Maersk and 49% by IBM. 

TradeLens is a profit-orientated business that provides a platform connecting all actors which 
implement  a  stage  of  the  global  end-to-end  services,  helping  companies  move  and  track 
goods  digitally  across  borders.  To  that  end,  the  platform  will  allow  participants  to  share 

1 August Braakman in Splash, https://splash247.com/digitalisation-globalisation-and-monopolisation-lines-create-trinity / 

1 

 
  
 
 
information and ease collaboration across the shipping industry’s supply chain. TradeLens is 
now supported by 6 of the world’s largest lines.  

In  order  to  offer  global  end-to-end  services,  shipping  lines  need  a  common  foundation  for 
technical interfaces and data and to develop common information technology standards. For 
this purpose, the Digital Container Shipping Association (DCSA) has been established. 

DCSA  aims  at  paving  the  way  for  digitalisation  and  standardisation  in  the  industry  and  its 
standards have been and will be further developed and managed by lines exclusively.  

At the moment, apart from COSCO-OOCL, all major container lines that are involved in one 
of the three global alliances are members of the DCSA, thus representing 70% of the global 
market. Furthermore, as all DCSA members support TradeLens, this means that the DSCA 
standards have become signatory for the industry.  

Antitrust  concerns  may  emerge  from  the  need  for  these  new  actors  to  have  access  to  the 
technical data underlying the DCSA standards in order to be able to research and develop 
new  standards.  Particularly  if  the  DCSA  standards  are  protected  by  IP-rights,  lines  may 
impose royalties or licensing terms. This behaviour may have severe antitrust implications 
that could be fostered in a situation where DCSA standards cover topics outside the 
legitimate standard-setting activity. 

These developments have a huge impact on the proper assessment of antitrust issues on this 
market,  particularly  in  the  following  areas:  (i)  scope:  the  market  has  undeniably  become  a 
global  market;  (ii)  structure:  the  ever-increasing  use  of  the  digital  technology  and  the 
establishment of companies like TradeLens which gather (iii) dominance: the majority of the 
big carriers. 

The tools the Commission currently possesses for measuring, evaluating and neutralizing anti-
competitive conduct were formulated in an era when Big Data and BI&A systems were still a 
vision for the future. These tools are far from adequate and effective for dealing with antitrust 
concerns in relation with these developments.  

Some  of  these  concerns  were  raised  in  the  framework  of  the  consultation  regarding  the 
Consortia  BER  for  liner  shipping2  and  it  was  stressed  upon  the  fact  that  digitalization, 
globalization and concentration in the container shipping may lead to anti-competitive effects 
due  to the  fact  that  the  provisions  of  the  Consortia  BER  are  lacking  clarity  about  do’s  and 
don’ts with respect to the exchange of information and that more and more container shipping 
lines  are  offering  door  to  door  services  and  using  of  Big  Data  and  BI&A  systems  to  their 
advantage.  

The absence of tools that are sufficiently adequate and effective for enabling EU and national 
antitrust authorities to measure, evaluate and neutralize the anticompetitive effects that may 
derive  from  the  above  mentioned  evolution  in  the  containerized  sector  is  becoming  a  real 
threat  for  a  number  of  actors  which  compete  with  shipping  lines  on  a  number  of  land  and 
logistics related services. 

2 https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/PDF/?uri=CELEX:32020R0436&from=EN 

2 

 
 
 
 
The weaknesses of the Consortia BER for liner shipping 

On the 24th of March 2020, in spite of strong reserves expressed by the majority of customers 
and  services  providers  of  the  liner  shipping  sector,  the  European  Commission  decided  to 
extend without modification the Consortia Block Exemption Regulation (CBER), granting the 
exemption by another 4 years. 

The  Consortia  BER  provides  for  an  exemption  from  the  cartel  prohibition  for  agreements/ 
arrangements  that  restrict  freedom  but  that  have  the  sole  effect  of  promoting  competition. 
Within the present context, the exemption relates to the following activities: 

1. 

the joint operation of liner shipping services including: 

(a) 

the coordination and/or joint fixing of sailing timetables and the determination 

of ports of call; 

(b) 
(c) 

the exchange, sale or cross-chartering of space or slots on vessels; 
the pooling of vessels and/or port installations; 

and 

4. 

any  other  activity  ancillary  to  those  referred  to  above  which  is  necessary  for  their 
implementation, such as: 

(a) 

the use of a computerized data exchange system. 

The Consortia BER contains a per se prohibition for “hard core” restrictions of competition. 
These restrictions include activities, which, directly or indirectly, in isolation or in combination 
with other factors under the control of the parties, have as their object: 

1. 

2. 

the fixing of prices when selling liner shipping services to third parties; 

the  limitation  of  capacity  or  sale  except  for  capacity  adjustments  in  response  to 
fluctuations in supply and demand. 

3. 

the allocation of markets or customers. 

Application of Article 101(1) TFEU presupposes that the prevention, restriction or distortion of 
competition is an “object or effect”.3   

The “hard core” prohibition of the fixing of prices when selling liner shipping services to third 
parties  laid  down  in  the  Consortia  BER  only  refers  to  arrangements  that  have  this  as  their 
object. Pursuant to the established case law of the ECJ, the circumstances surrounding its 
attainment  may  also  be  used  in  interpreting  the  wording  of  arrangements  for  those  areas, 
which are unclear.  As a result, not only the fixing of prices but also price recommendations 
and tariff impositions, by any per person on transport users, fall within the scope of the “hard 
core” prohibition of the consortia BER, provided they have a similar anticompetitive impact. 

Arrangements that do not have a restriction on competition as their object may also be caught 
by the prohibition on cartels because they have it as their effect. This effect does not need to 
have  actually  occurred.  It  is  sufficient  for  it  to  appear  likely  in the  near  future.  This  second 

3 August Braakman in Splash, https://splash247.com/digitalisation-globalisation-and-monopolisation-lines-create-trinity / 

3 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
alternative for application of the prohibition therefore permits the Commission to intervene to 
prevent distortions of competition at an early stage.  

The  competition-limiting  effect  of  an  arrangement  may  be  the  result  of  it  alone  or  of  the 
interaction  between  it  and  the  accompanying  economic  circumstances.  Special  importance 
may, in particular, be attached to the fact that an agreement is part of a network of similar 
agreements that the party has also completed with other undertakings and the fact that the 
market  contains  other  networks  of  agreements  which  have  been  build  up  by  other 
undertakings.  

In view of the above, it should be assessed whether the  prohibition of Article 101(1) TFEU 
catches the competition-limiting effects of the above-mentioned activities that are exempted 
from the cartel prohibition in combination with the computerized data exchange system that is 
being used. This assessment should focus on whether the prohibition of Article 101(1) 
TFEU  applies  or  is  likely  to  apply  in  the  near  future,  once  BI&A  systems  with  their 
current 
existing 
agreements/arrangements that benefit from the exemption under the Consortia BER.  

features  have  been 

state-of-the-art 

incorporated 

into 

the  semantic 
This  assessment  should 
interoperability of these systems with the computer programs of other actors that have been 
engaged for the implementation of the agreements/arrangements. 

include  possible  anticompetitive  effects  of 

Alliances are using vessel-sharing agreements and consider that those agreements will not 
affect mutual competition. The basic rationale for alliances is the facilitation of low rates and 
broad service coverage.4 The deployment of data that is allowed to be exchanged under the 
Consortia BER gives a line the possibility of attaining these objectives in a way that seriously 
threatens fair and undistorted competition if the exchange takes place within the context of a 
BI&A system with current state-of-the-art features which is semantically interoperable with the 
computer programs used by the parties that have been engaged for the implementation of its 
services.  

All  lines  that  participate in  one  of  the  three  mega-alliances  -  2M,  Ocean  Alliance  and  THE 
Alliance  -  also  participate in  one  or more  of  the vast  number  of  conference and  discussion 
agreements  that  exist  worldwide.5  These  agreements  serve  as  vehicles  for  exchanging 
strategically sensitive data. They are exempt from the application of antitrust laws in 
the  United  States  and  some  Asian  countries,  like  Singapore,  but  they  were  never 
exempt from application in the EU.6 In light of the global coverage of global end-to-end 
services  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  data  exchanged  between  members  of  an 
alliance on the key parameters of the rates for the non-EU leg of the route provides an 
important indicator, indeed if not the basis, for the pricing policy adopted for the global 
services inclusive of the EU-leg of the route. BI&A systems with their current state-of-the-
art features offer a major improvement for analyzing this data. As a result, the deployment of 
these systems may seriously aggravate the anticompetitive effects of the data exchanged.  

4 The impact of alliances in container shipping. OECD/ITF 2018, p.11. 
5 August Braakman in Splash, https://splash247.com/digitalisation-globalisation-and-monopolisation-lines-create-trinity / 
6  See  Competition  issues  in  liner  shipping:  Note  by  the  Secretariat.  Document  DAF/COMP/WP(2015)3.  Organisation  for 
Economic Cooperation and Development, Paris, 10 June 2015.   
Available http://www.oecd.org/officialdocuments/publicdisplaydocumentpdf/?cote=DAF/COMP/WP2(2015)3&docLanguage=En. 

4 

 
 
The above anticompetitive effects are particularly apparent if the exchange of data takes place 
within the context of services that are being implemented by a line together with other actors 
and  the  BI&A  system  used  by  the  line  has  been  made  semantically  interoperable  with  the 
computer programs of the latter.  

The  deployment  of  BI&A  systems  with  their  current  state-of-the-art  features  on  the 
market of containerized liner shipping services7 may well result in pushing exchanges 
of  information  that  conform  to  the  exemption  conditions  of  the  consortia  BER  in  its 
current version into the area of hard core restrictions.  

This may be illustrated by the following, hypothetical example: An alliance, either directly or 
indirectly  through  one  of  the  participating  lines,  acquires  exclusive  rights  on  a  new  BI&A 
product protected by IP rights.  

This  product  substantially  improves  the  joint  coordination  of  sailing  timetables  within  the 
alliance and thereby the determination of ports-of-call. As such, these activities fall within the 
exemption of the Consortia BER. However, the alliance offers the new product to third parties 
as part of its liner shipping services at a price that was fixed by the parties to the alliance who 
conjointly  own  the  product  in  mutual  consultation.  In  doing  so,  the  alliance  and  the 
participating lines violate the hard-core restriction of Article 4 sub 1 of the consortia 
BER. Furthermore, if other lines or alliances cannot come up with a timely response by 
bringing up a product that “leapfrogs” the new BI&A product, this may cause shippers 
to disproportionally  opt  for  the services  offered  by  the  alliance  that  disposes  of this 
latter product. As a result, other lines and alliances lose their competitiveness for the duration 
of the validity of this new product’s IP rights. This will give the alliance that disposes of the 
new product entrenched market power 8 which, in turn, may well encourage it to raise the price 
of its services, arguing that it has the right to do so in order to recoup the investments that had 
to be made.  

In the above hypothetical situation, the new BI&A product transforms the coordination 
of sailing timetables within the alliance disposing of this product into conduct that has 
immediate,  substantial  and  foreseeable  anti-competitive  effects  on  the  EU  market9. 
Such conduct falls within the prohibition of Article 101(1) and Article 4 sub 1 of the current 
consortia BER and/or 102 TFEU, at least during the validity of the IP rights. 

It has been argued above that an effective and smooth implementation of a global end-to-end 
contract requires a line/alliance to be made privy to confidential data - possibly protected by 
IP  rights  -  owned  by  actors  that  have  been  engaged  for  the  implementation  thereof.  Thus, 
within the framework of these contracts the free pass for exchanges of information as provided 
by  the  current  Consortia  BER  extends  to  data  that  has  been  developed  and  protected  by 
actors  whose  activities  relate  to  sections  of  the  shipping  industry  where  market  and 
competitive  conditions  fundamentally  differ  from  those  that  lines  are  confronted  with  in  the 
context of their core business.  

7 The Impact of alliances in container shipping, OECD/ITF 2018, p. 88. 
8 This example is based on the decision of the Commission of 4 September 2012 in the case named Telefonica, Vodafone and 
Everything Everywhere, case No COMP/M.6314 (JV). 
9 August Braakman in Splash, https://splash247.com/digitalisation-globalisation-and-monopolisation-lines-create-trinity / 

5 

 
 
The  inclusion  of  this  data  in  a  new  BI&A  product  that  substantially  improves  the 
coordination  of  sailing  timetables  will  further  reinforce  the  market  position  of  the 
alliance that disposes of this product, as well as anticompetitive issues.  

Self-assessments  from  the  perspective  of  the  global  market  in  which  lines  operate 
should  also  relate  to  data  on  issues  that  are  allowed  under  some  jurisdictions  but 
prohibited under EU antitrust law. Thus, the possibilities for the Commission to monitor 
distortions of competition from the perspective of the extra-territorial application of EU 
antitrust law and the qualified effects doctrine would be improved. This could facilitate 
other  actors  in  the  maritime  transport  in  their  attempts  to  challenge  agreements 
implying undesirable market effects.10  

The legal vacuum 

As  yet,  the  EU  Commission  does  not  dispose  of  tools  that  are  sufficiently  adequate  and 
effective  to  guarantee  fair  and  undistorted  competition  and  a  level  playing  field  to  all  the 
stakeholders in the competitive environment of containerized liner shipping services that has 
been unlocked by Big Data and BI&A systems. The ensuing legal vacuum creates a complex 
legal border area 

The present circumstances, however unfortunate they may be, do not absolve undertakings 
from the obligation to assess whether the agreements/arrangements to which they are party, 
directly or indirectly, in isolation or in combination with other factors under their control, have 
as  their  object  or  effect  distortions  of  competition  that  emerge  in  the  realm  of  the  major 
parameters that govern the BI&A systems which underlie the logistics chain of their services.  

This implies that, apart from prices, account should be taken of common information 
technology  standards,  engagement  of  actors  in  the  implementation  of  services, 
implementation of services as such and trust. Irrespective of the Consortia BER being 
now prolonged in what manner, this assessment should be made in light of the impact 
BI&A systems with their current and anticipated state-of-the-art features together with 
the surrounding Big Data have on the promotion of competition that must be generated 
in  order  for  agreements/arrangements  to  be  considered  for  an  exemption  from  the 
prohibition of Article 101(1) TFEU.  

EU  antitrust  law  as  laid  in  Articles  101  and  102  of  the  Treaty  on  the  Functioning  of  the 
European  Union  (TFEU)  is  addressed  to  undertakings.  Article  101  TFEU  also  applies  to 
associations of undertakings, insofar as their own activities or the activities of the undertakings 
of  which  they  are  composed  have  as  their  object  the  prevention,  restriction  or  distortion  of 
competition.  

The  definition  of  the  term  undertaking  includes  all  natural  or  legal  persons  engaged  in  an 
independent  commercial  activity,  either  as  suppliers  or  customers  of  goods  or  commercial 
services. Such activity must have a certain regularity and duration. The pursuit of profit is not 
essential. 

10 The Impact of alliances in container shipping, OECD/ITF 2018, p. 88. 

6 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
With the introduction of Regulation 1/200311 on May 1, 2004, the general procedure applicable 
to antitrust investigations is fully applicable to the maritime sector.  Under this new system, 
not  only  the  prohibition  of  cartels  contained  in  Article  101(1)  TFEU  but  also  the  possible 
exemptions to this prohibition contained in Article 101(3) TFEU are directly applicable. This 
implies that self-assessment by companies and their advisor constitutes the true cornerstone 
of the system. The block exemption regulations and the notices by the Commission on the 
substantive criteria for the application of the EU antitrust rules provide guidance. 

For different contract types the EU Commission has adopted the Consortia BER which should 
be interpreted in close conjunction with the Horizontal Guidelines.12 

The relevant market 

The relevant market within which to assess a given competition issue is established by the 
combination of the product and geographic market. 

“The relevant product market comprises all those products and/or services which are regarded 
as interchangeable or substitutable by the consumer, by reason of their characteristics, their 
prices and their intended use.”13 

The Commission and the ECJ held that the relevant product market comprises containerized 
liner shipping services.14 The decisions and judgements relate to maritime transport in deep-
sea trades.  

The above case law on the definition of the relevant product and geographic market relates to 
a  time  when  lines  could  not  yet  avail  themselves  of  BI&A  systems,  certainly  not  of  BI&A 
systems with the current level of technical sophistication. The current definition of the relevant 
product and geographic market is not valid anymore as the relevant product market is the 
market of containerized liner shipping global end-to-end services.15 

This implies that in the geographic market of containerized liner shipping global end-to-end 
services the EU-end of the market is not a range of ports either in Northern Europe or in the 
Mediterranean, but the inland terminal where the customer takes possession of the cargo. 

The  proposed  definition  of  the  relevant  product  and  geographic  market  entails  that,  in 
assessing  competition  issues,  no  distinction  can  be  made  between  the  deep-sea  and  the 
inland  leg  of  the  services.  Both  services  relate  to  one  and  the  same  relevant  market. 
Therefore, assessment of competition issues must be made from the perspective of one and 
the  same  legal  regime.  This  implies  that  the  judgement  of  the  General  Court,  making  a 

11  Council  Regulation  (EC)  No  1/2003  of  16  December  2002  on  the  implementation  of the  rules  on  competition  laid  down  in 
Articles 81 and 82 of the Treaty (Text with EEA relevance). 
12 Guidelines on the applicability of Article 101 TFEU to horizontal cooperation agreements, OJ C11/1 of 14 January 2011 
13 Commission Notice on the definition of relevant market for the purposes of Community competition law, OJ C 372, 9.12.1997 
14 Commission Decision 1999/485/EC of 30 April 1999 (Case IV/34.250 — Europe Asia Trades  Agreement) (OJ L 193, 26.7.1999, 
p. 23); TAA decision, Commission Decision 94/980/EC of 19 October 1994 in Case IV/34.446 — Trans-Atlantic Agreement (OJ 
L 376, 31.12.1994, p. 1) and the TACA decision, Commission Decision 1999/243/EC of 16 September 1998 (Case IV/35.134 — 
Trans-Atlantic Conference Agreement) (OJ L 95, 9.4.1999, p. 1) paragraphs 60-84. The market definition in the TACA decision 
was confirmed by the General Court in its Judgment in Joined Cases T-191/98, T-212/98 to T-214/98, Atlantic Container Line AB 
and Others v Commission ECLI:EU:T:2003:245, paragraphs 781-883. 
15 See e.g. The impact of alliances on container shipping, OECD/ITF 2018, p. 89. 

7 

 
 
 
distinction between the legal regimes that govern deep-sea and inland services, has become 
obsolete with regard to containerized liner shipping global end-to-end services. 

Considering the above, the definition of the relevant market should be completed by an 
assessment of the interconnection between the services that are offered and the Big 
Data and BI&A systems that are used for their implementation. In that way the logistics 
areas  can  be  identified  where  conditions  of  competition  are  sufficiently  homogenous  for  a 
customer  to  regard  the  services  that  are  offered  as  interchangeable  because  of  their 
characteristics.  

Managing the impact on competition brought about by the proposed definition of the relevant 
market is a crucial issue that will guarantee fair and undistorted competition and a level playing 
field for all stakeholders. It should be a priority for the EU Commission with a new tool.  

The  definition  of  the  relevant  market  as  provided  by  the  Commission  Notice  of  1997  has 
become  obsolete,  particularly in  regard to  the market  of  containerized liner  shipping  global 
end-to-end contracts.16 This Notice should be amended by including a definition of the 
temporal market as an independent dimension, and by tailoring the definitions of the 
relevant product, geographic and temporal market to the developments in the field of 
Big Data and BI&A.  

From the perspective of the proposed definition of the relevant market, the qualified effects 
doctrine should provide the Commission with an adequate and effective tool for acting against 
distortions of competition that originate from conduct outside the EU, even if such application 
of EU antitrust law were to be in conflict with antitrust laws of other jurisdictions.17  

Common standards 

Common information technology standards lie at the heart of the interoperability of the BI&A 
system that a line/alliance uses for governing containerized liner shipping global end-to-end 
services  and  the  computer  programs  of  the  actors  that  have  been  engaged  for  the 
implementation  thereof. It  is  important  to assess  whether common  industry-wide  standards 
and the way in which they are deployed would raise antitrust concerns. 

Antitrust concerns are among those that may emerge if common standards are developed and 
managed  exclusively  by  lines.  Other  actors  on  the  market  of  containerized  liner  shipping 
services can register for the purpose of receiving the data required for using the standards, 
but they will have no say in the further development of the underlying technology.  

This  will  increase  their  dependence,  particularly  if  new  standards  have  been  developed  in 
which  valuable  data  and  processes  have  been  encoded  that  were  used  in  standards  that 
governed previous global end-to-end contracts. If the latter standards had defects and quirks 
and/or technical limitations, new forms of industry actors will be obliged to replicate them  to 
maintain interoperability.  

16 See A.J. Braakman, Brexit and its consequences for containerized liner shipping services, (2017) 23 JMIL, pp. 1-12. 
17 Guidelines on the application of the EC Treaty to maritime transports services, OJ C 245/2 of 26 September 2008. 

8 

 
 
 
Antitrust concerns may also emerge from the need for other industry actors to have access to 
the  technical  data  underlying  the  common,  industry-wide  standards  in  order  to  be  able  to 
research  and  develop  new  standards.  This  will  be  particularly  difficult  if  industry-wide 
standards are protected by IP-rights, lines may prevent access by demanding unreasonable 
royalties or expensive licensing terms.  

Finally, antitrust concerns may emerge from the fact that common, industry-wide standards 
progressively increase the dependence of their users on one and the same eco-system.  

Conclusion 

Big Data and BI&A systems are here to stay. The ways in which shipping lines deploy them 
pose  a  serious  threat  to  fair  and  undistorted  competition  and  a  level  playing  field  to  all 
stakeholders on the market of containerized liner shipping global end-to-end services.  

The  tools  the  Commission  possess  for  measuring,  evaluating,  and  neutralizing  the 
anticompetitive effects of Big Data and BI&A systems have been formulated in an era when 
these phenomena were still a vision for the future. Therefore, the current tools are unfit to do 
the job.  

There is a need for the regulator to take into account the impact of Big Data and the ensuing 
BI&A systems on the competitive environment of containerized liner shipping global end-to-
end services.  

9 

 
 
 
 
