Ref. Ares(2020)4709453 - 09/09/2020

The Consumer Voice in Europe 

DIGITAL SERVICES ACT (EX ANTE RULES) AND NEW 
COMPETITION TOOL  

Response to public consultations  

Contact: Agustin Reyna and Vanessa Turner - competition@beuc.eu 

BUREAU EUROPÉEN DES UNIONS DE CONSOMMATEURS AISBL | DER EUROPÄISCHE VERBRAUCHERVERBAND  
Rue d’Arlon 80, B-1040 Brussels • Tel. +32 (0)2 743 15 90 • www.twitter.com/beuc • www.beuc.eu 
EC register for interest representatives: identification number 9505781573 -45 

  Co-funded by the European Union 

Ref: BEUC-X-2020 -079  07/10/2020 

1 

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Why it matters to consumers 

Whilst the increasing sophistication of services offered by big tech companies has brought 
many benefits for consumers, it is also clear that many digital markets are not working as 
they should. Without healthy, competitive markets, consumers will not be offered the best 
choices, prices or the most innovative products and services. Competition law enforcement 
in  digital  markets,  though  important,  has  not  been  effective  enough  in  dealing  with  all 
problems in these markets and consequently not able to remedy, let alone prevent, harm 
to consumers in a timely manner. It is therefore in consumers’ interests to put in place 
additional tools to deal with these weaknesses. At the same time, it would be beneficial to 
consumers  for  the  European  Commission  to  expand  its  toolbox  to  deal  with  harmful 
structural competition problems in other markets beyond digital. 

Summary 

This paper  summarises BEUC’s main views  on the  European Commission’s consultations 
on (1) the Digital Services Act package: an ex ante regulatory instrument for large online 
platforms with significant network effects acting as gatekeepers in the European Union’s 
Internal Market (“Ex Ante Regulation”) and (2) a New Competition Tool (“NCT”).   

BEUC welcomes the opportunity to respond to these two Commission consultations. The 
challenges posed in particular by large players in digital markets require new instruments 
in  addition  to  traditional  competition  law  enforcement  in  order  to  protect  consumers’ 
interests in an effective and timely manner.  

BEUC would highlight the following in relation to the two consultations:  

Digital Services Act (DSA)  

•  BEUC supports the introduction of asymmetric Ex Ante Regulation for large online 

platforms with significant network effects acting as gatekeepers.  

•  BEUC favours the creation of a “blacklist” of prohibitions and, where appropriate, 
of targeted obligations (“a DSA prohibitions and obligations list”), comprising a 
list  of  comprehensive,  self-enforcing  and  regularly  reviewable 
defined 
prohibitions and obligations for large online platforms acting as gatekeepers. This 
could  be  complemented  by  case-by-case  enforcement  of  further  obligations 
where  appropriate  under  the  NCT  or  through  enforcement  of  Articles  101  and 
102 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union (TFEU).  

•  BEUC supports the creation of an interdisciplinary body within the Commission to 
be responsible for monitoring and enforcement of such Ex Ante Regulation where 
necessary. 

1 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Competition Tool (NCT)  

•  BEUC supports the introduction of a market structure-based competition tool with 

horizontal scope.  

•  For the NCT to be effective, the Commission must be vested with powers not only 
to investigate situations where problems are suspected but also to impose and 
enforce effective remedies if these concerns are substantiated. 

•  The legal and evidentiary thresholds, distinguishing the NCT from enforcement 

of Articles 101 and 102 TFEU, must be clearly set out. 

Overall,  BEUC  favours  a  combination  of  Ex  Ante  Regulation  based  on  a  DSA 
prohibitions and obligations list to be included in the DSA and any case-by-case 
assessment to be addressed in the context of the NCT. With this approach, we would 
be  able  to  build  on  existing  experience  and  expertise  while  at  the  same  time  targeting 
specific practices that we do not want to see taking place in digital or other markets. 

2 

 
 
 
 
General Remarks   

BEUC  welcomes  the  opportunity  to  expand  on  its  response  to  the  consultation  on  the 
Roadmaps  on  the    (1)    Digital    Services    Act    (DSA)  package:    Ex    ante    regulatory  
instrument    for    large    online    platforms    with    significant  network  effects  acting  as 
gatekeepers in the European Union’s Internal Market (“Ex Ante Regulation”) and (2) the 
New Competition Tool (“NCT”).1 

While the digital economy has brought important benefits to consumers, in more recent 
times  some  markets  have  become  excessively  concentrated  with  a  few  large  platforms 
becoming gatekeepers2 for many digital products and services accessed by consumers. The 
structure and characteristics of some digital markets also enable participants to act in ways 
that  can  significantly  harm  competition  and  innovation,  for  example  raising  barriers  to 
alternative  business  models  that  do  not  seek  to  exploit  consumer  data.  This  harms 
consumers, in the form of higher prices, lower quality and less choice.  

Competition  law  enforcement  has  identified  certain  types  of  conduct  that  have  been 
engaged  in  repeatedly  by  some  online  platforms  to  the  detriment  of  consumers.  Self-
preferencing in vertically related markets such as general search and comparison shopping, 
local  search,  travel,  etc.  can,  for  example,  have  negative  effects  not  only  directly  on 
consumer choice but also on innovation and competition, and can strengthen the cross-
market  power  of  large  online  platforms  into  ever  broader  areas  of  consumers’  lives. 
Practices leading to the “lock-in” of consumers into an ecosystem, particularly in the light 
of high switching costs and information asymmetries for consumers, are another example 
of such harmful conduct. The characteristics and structure of some digital markets today 
are such that it is hardly possible for innovative newcomers to enter and for competition 
to flourish to the benefit of consumers.  

While  individual  competition  law  enforcement  cases  have  sanctioned  and  required 
remedies, this has taken many years during which the harm to competition and consumers 
has  persisted.  There  is  also  some  doubt  about  the  effectiveness  of  remedies  in  digital 
market cases. Competition cases and multiple international studies3 have identified wide 
ranging and self-reinforcing harms to competition in digital and related markets, and the 
inability  of  these  markets  to  self-correct.  Therefore,  BEUC  strongly  supports  the 
introduction of new measures that can help to prevent, rather  than belatedly attempt to 
cure, the resulting harms to consumers. 

Given  the  specific  new  challenges  in  digital  and  related  markets  previously  identified4, 
whilst existing  competition  rules must be actively used to deal with illegal behaviour by 
market players, these  rules  are  not  suited  to  effectively address all problems posed in 
particular by  the  large  players  in  digital  markets such as parallel leveraging strategies 
into multiple adjacent market or market tipping. These challenges call for new instruments 
at EU level to protect consumers’ interests in an effective and timely manner. 

1 BEUC contribution to the roadmaps on the DSA and the New Competition Tool, available at  
http://www.beuc.eu/publications/beuc-x-2020-059_beuc_response_to_roadmaps_dsa_ex-ante_and_nct.pdf 
2 Suggestions for criteria to identify gatekeeper platforms are set out below on page 6. 
3 Including most recently, the in-depth analysis of digital advertising markets by the UK CMA - Online Platforms 
and Digital Advertising Market Study, 1 July 2020, https://www.gov.uk/cma-cases/online-platforms-and-digital-
advertising-market-study#final-report.                                                                                         
4 BEUC response to the public consultation on the “Shaping of Competition Policy in the Era of Digitalisation”, 
available at https://www.beuc.eu/publications/beuc-x-2018-
084_beuc_response_shaping_of_competition_policy.pdf ; BEUC report “The Role of Competition Policy in 
Protecting Consumers’ Wellbeing in the Digital Era”, available at  https://www.beuc.eu/publications/beuc-x-
2019-054_competition_policy_in_digital_markets.pdf  

3 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
At the same time, experience at Member State level has shown that such instruments can 
be  beneficial  to  tackle  market-wide  problems  in  other  sectors  like  financial  services, 
energy, healthcare/pharma and transport - leading to the imposition of remedies to make 
such  markets  work  better  for  consumers  in  ways  that  cannot  be  done  under  existing 
competition law. 

Complementing  competition  enforcement  with  rules  tackling  specific  market 
structural problems, and adding new powers to the toolbox of the Commission, 
would create a legal and enforcement framework capable of addressing the blind-
spots of competition law enforcement and creating the conditions for consumer 
welfare to thrive in the digital economy and other markets. 

BEUC’s input is based on the understanding that there should be no overlap, confusion 
or friction between the DSA ex ante rules and the NCT but that they will complement 
each other’s role in ensuring that markets are open, competitive and fair.  

Case-by-case 
investigations 
regarding the 
finding of an 
infringement  

Tackling market-wide 
structural problems 
not linked to the 
existence of an 
infringement and 
case-by-case 
anticompetitive 
conduct for which 
Articles 101 and 102 
are not effective 

List of prohibited practices 
and obligations for 
gatekeeping platforms 

Furthermore,  the  Commission  will  need  to  ensure  consistency  between  these  new 
instruments and other EU policies, in particular the Commission’s European Strategy for 
Data, AI policy and the Platform-to-Business Regulation. 

Further comments are set out below for each proposed instrument respectively. 

4 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Digital Services Act (Ex Ante Regulation) 

There  is  today  substantial  evidence  showing  that  large  online  platforms  are  currently 
protected by strong and self-reinforcing incumbency advantages,5 which they actively seek 
to maintain. They can apply their very considerable market power in an unfettered manner 
that  hampers  the  development  of  well-functioning  digital  markets  to  the  detriment  of 
consumers. In light of this, and the particular characteristics of the digital economy, BEUC 
supports  the  proposal  for  ex  ante  regulation  of  large  online  platforms  with  significant 
network  effects  acting  as  gatekeepers  so  as  to  establish  clear  prohibited  practices  and 
obligations for such platforms.  

Such ex ante regulation should both prevent harmful practices by large online platforms 
and  open  markets  to  new  entrants,  including  SMEs  and  start-ups,  thereby  promoting 
consumer  choice,  driving  innovation  and  offering  alternative,  more  consumer-friendly 
business models.  It could also benefit consumers by going some way towards redressing 
the significant imbalances in bargaining power  between large  online platforms and their 
users. 

Any ex ante regulation must therefore first prevent, and where necessary terminate in a 
timely  way,  any  harmful  practices  by  large  online  platforms;  and  second,  set  up 
mechanisms or rules to ensure that digital markets function competitively and fairly. Both 
of these are essential to protect the interests of consumers.  

Key underlying principles for ex ante regulation should include: 

•  Ensuring the functioning of the internal market and avoiding gatekeeper practices 

that harm consumers' interests. 

•  Avoiding  fragmentation  of  the  Single  Market  arising  from  inconsistent  rules 
(e.g.  diverging  national  rules  on  prohibitions  and  obligations  for  platforms)  or 
divergent enforcement of such rules. However, existing enforcement standards 
at national level should not be weakened. 

•  Avoiding lengthy delays before ex ante regulation establishes clear, enforceable 
prohibited  practices  and  obligations  for  large  online  platforms.  Given  the 
characteristics of digital markets, the problems identified are unlikely to self-correct 
but  rather  to  become  increasingly  entrenched  with  the  further  passage  of  time.  
Over-engineering the system and the ensuing delay risks exacerbating the current 
situation.  

•  A  requirement  for  Data  Protection  Authorities  and  the  European  Data  Protection 
Board  to  be  involved  in  the  design  of  measures  and  remedies  involving  the 
processing  of  consumers’  personal  data.6  Current  gatekeeper  platforms  have  a 

5 These include network effects, economies of scale, unequal access to user data but also the power of defaults, 
the lack of transparency and vertical integration. For more details, see UK CMA - Online Platforms and Digital 
Advertising Market Study, fn. 2; European Commission, Competition Policy for the digital era final report, 2019: 
https://ec.europa.eu/competition/publications/reports/kd0419345enn.pdf; see also Furman 2019, Unlocking 
Digital Competition, p. 5, available at 
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/785547/un
locking_digital_competition_furman_review_web.pdf; Stigler Committee on Digital Platforms, Final Report, 
September 2019, page 36 (“Stigler Report (2019)”). available at: 
https://research.chicagobooth.edu/stigler/media/news/committee-on-digital-platforms-final-report; European 
Commission Report on Competition Policy for the digital era - Jacques Crémer, Yves-Alexandre de Montjoye, 
Heike Schweitzer, (“Report on Competition Policy for the digital era”),  see p. 113-116 available at: 
https://ec.europa.eu/competition/publications/reports/kd0419345enn.pdf. 
6 See   BEUC   position   paper   “Access   to   consumers’ data   in   the   digital economy”, available   at   
https://www.beuc.eu/publications/beuc-x-2019-068_european_data_policy.pdf 

5 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
record  of  not  respecting  the  EU’s  personal  data  protection  rules.  Data  protection 
rights,  obligations  and  principles  of  the  General  Data  Protection  Regulation 
(GDPR)  must  be  more  strongly  taken  into  account  in  the  context  of 
competition. The GDPR must be enforced and be fully applicable.  

•  For  legal  certainty  and  to  avoid  potential  forum  shopping  between  different  legal 
instruments and enforcers it will be important to ensure clear demarcation and 
consistency with the concurrently proposed New Competition Tool both in 
scope of application and enforcement.   

•  The ex ante regulation roadmap notes that one source of the economic power of 
large  online  platforms  is  their  ability  to  take  over  competitors.  The  Commission 
should also consider this aspect and review options in particular with regard to the 
impact on innovation of large online platforms’ acquisitions of start-ups.7   

Based on these principles, BEUC suggests that ex ante regulation include the following: 

Asymmetric regulation 

BEUC recommends the introduction of asymmetric ex ante regulation of large online 
platforms with significant network effects acting as gatekeepers (“gatekeepers”). 
Blanket ex ante regulation of platforms without such a gatekeeper function risks harming 
other platforms’ ability to compete with the gatekeepers and therefore reduce incentives 
to innovate and offer better products to consumers. Additional obligations that reflect other 
EU law principles and objectives such as consumer protection should however be imposed 
separately on all platforms, for example, in the field of liability of platforms for products 
sold  in  the  marketplaces  and  a  general  duty  to  deal  fairly  with  consumers  (principle  of 
“fairness by design). Furthermore, should there be specific reasons requiring remediation 
of anticompetitive conduct of non-gatekeepers, this could be done by other means, notably 
through the NCT or antitrust enforcement. 

Identification of gatekeepers 

The clear identification of gatekeepers as well as the conduct to be regulated are essential 
to the effectiveness of the ex ante regulation. This should be done on the basis of clear 
and simple criteria to enable self-enforcing8 prohibitions and obligations as far as 
possible, thereby bringing immediate changes to the market to the benefit of consumers. 
Complexity  or  ambiguity  in  the  criteria,  leaving  them  open  to  differing  interpretations, 
would risk lengthy debates and the ability of gatekeepers to delay the effect of regulation 
which would be contrary to consumers’ interests. 

BEUC  suggests  that  the  ex  ante  regulation  should  therefore  first  identify  which 
markets/product  areas  are  susceptible  to  gatekeepers  based  on  the  characteristics 
(identifying criteria) of the markets, e.g. substantial network effects, economies of scale 
and scope, lock-in effects on users/consumers (and inability of consumers to multi-home), 
high switching-costs for consumers and data dependency. Such markets could include for 
example,  online  intermediation  services  (consumer-facing  online  platforms  such  as  e-
commerce marketplaces, social media, mobile app stores, etc), search engines, operating 
systems for smart devices and online advertising intermediation services, many of which 
have been already identified and defined in EU law (i.e. Platform to Business Regulation). 

7 See  BEUC  contribution  to  the  OECD  best-practice  roundtables  on  competition  policy, “Start-ups,  killer  
acquisitions                    and                    merger                    control”, available                    at                    
https://one.oecd.org/document/DAF/COMP/WD(2020)30/en/pdf 
8 Self-enforcing criteria are understood as criteria that are sufficiently clear that platforms would be in a 
position to self-assess their qualification as gatekeepers and their requirement to comply with the relevant 
prohibitions and obligations. 

6 

 
   
 
 
The initial set of markets/product areas concerned based on the identifying criteria could 
be set out in an annex to the regulation. 

As a second step, within these markets/product areas, platforms which fulfilled specified 
easily verifiable criteria set out in the regulation would then be classified as gatekeepers 
and subject to the specific list of prohibitions and obligations. Ideally, these non-cumulative 
criteria  should include  easily measurable parameters in order to make the regulation as 
straightforward  as  possible.  These  criteria  could  therefore  include,  at  thresholds  to  be 
determined, the number of users in the EU and the EU turnover of the company.9 

This  approach  should  enable  platforms  to  unequivocally  determine  whether  they  are 
gatekeepers and thus the need to comply with clear prohibitions and obligations. The ex 
ante regulation should also provide for both the market/product area and platform criteria 
to be regularly reviewable in the review clause of the legislative instrument, for example 
every two years following a report from the Commission (see below).  

Scope of regulation 

We  favour  “a  DSA  list  of  prohibited  practices  and  limited  obligations  (where 
appropriate), i.e. the Option 3a”, in the Ex Ante Inception Impact Assessment, provided it 
is possible to draw up a list of practices considered to be always harmful in such a way 
that they can be easily enforced and not circumvented by platforms.  Establishing such a 
list would be a more immediate way to correct harmful practices, and to signal to market 
players what is acceptable and what is not. Case by case analysis, though providing more 
flexibility, requires significantly more time to produce results. It seems unlikely that a case 
by  case  approach,  without  precisely  pre-determined  parameters10,  could  be  materially 
quicker  than  a  competition  case  under  existing  law  where  it  requires  the  thorough 
investigation and balancing of multiple factors.   

Practices included in a DSA prohibitions and obligations list would need to be unambiguous, 
exclude any efficiency defence11 or disincentives to innovate, be broad enough in scope to 
catch all relevant conduct, but sufficiently precisely defined to have a clear signalling and 
self-enforcing  effect  for  gatekeepers  and  to  be  simply  monitored.  Therefore,  it  seems 
unlikely  that  the  list  would  be  the  same  for  the  different  large  platforms  and  different 
services offered. 

The  DSA  prohibitions  and  obligations  list  could  also  be  supplemented  by  additional 
guidance  notices  (as  in  the  field  of  competition  enforcement)  to  bring  legal  certainty  to 
market players and stimulate compliance through self-assessment. 

As for the gatekeeper criteria, it would be essential to review and update this prohibitions 
and  obligations  list  regularly,  for  example  every  two  years,  to  ensure  that  it  reflected 
current market and business practices in fast moving digital markets.  

The following practices could be considered for inclusion in the initial list, though not all 
would be relevant for every type of gatekeeper12: 

9 The definition of gatekeepers would thus be different to the concepts of dominance under competition law and 
significant market power under telecoms regulation. 
10  Similar to the pre-determined scope of detailed regulation in other regulated sectors. 
11 In other words, where the harm would be so obvious that it would preclude the possibility to argue that the 
conduct is necessary or justified. 
12 BEUC would recommend that the Commission considers the type of conduct identified as problematic in the 
UK CMA Online Platforms and Digital Market Study and proposed to be included in the UK’s binding code of 
conduct for Google/Facebook. 

7 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
•  Prohibition  on  self-preferencing  in  specified  circumstances  (e.g.  in  ad  tech  and 
specialised search) by whatever means, including AI; this could be based on non-
discrimination principles developed for telecoms regulation and adapted for digital 
markets. 

•  Restrictions on the use of pre-installation and defaults (in particular, for browsers 

and search engines).  

•  Restrictions on the use of unfair practices known as “dark patterns”. Such practices 
can  consist  in  misleading  choice  architecture  and  phishing  and  sludging13 
techniques14.  In  this  regard,  gatekeepers  could  be  subject  to  specific  obligations, 
which  can  be  inspired  by  the  requirements  of  the  Unfair  Commercial  Practices 
Directive, to ensure that they make it as easy as possible for consumers to make 
genuine choices.15  

•  Restrictions on changing how core services work without due notice to the user and 

affected business partner (e.g. algorithms). 

•  Restrictions  on  gathering  and/or  use  of  data  by  gatekeepers  from  their  business 
users to gain competitive advantage (to the extent necessary beyond the Platform 
to Business Regulation, which is solely based on disclosure).   

•  Restrictions on the use of consumer data obtained by one service/entity by another 

service/entity within the gatekeeper’s ecosystem. 

•  Prohibitions on tying practices by gatekeepers in the form of forcing consumers who 

wish to access a service to agree to use/install a different service. 

•  Where platforms offer interoperability, prohibiting discrimination and termination of 
interoperability  (whether contractually or technically/by design) where this would 
harm platform users. 

•  Obligations to report specified relevant information to the  Commission (annually) 

on particular activities. 

Prohibited practices may generally be more suited to inclusion in a pre-determined list than 
most  positive  obligations.  Insofar  as  additional  case-by-case  positive  obligations  are 
necessary, these could be established either in sectoral legislation as already done in the 
European Electronic Communication Code regarding interoperability or through the NCT. 

Monitoring and enforcement/Institutional architecture 

The issues at stake here are by their very nature cross-border. To ensure that enforcement 
of a DSA prohibitions and obligations list was effective and consistent, in the interests of 
both  consumers  and  businesses  alike,  it  would  ideally  be  done  at  EU  level  within  the 
Commission. 

Monitoring  and  enforcement  could  be  done  by  the  European  Commission,  potentially 
through  an  interdisciplinary  body  comprising  participants  from  the  relevant  Commission 
services, and working in close cooperation with designated national enforcement bodies, 
the European Data Protection Supervisor and Board. This composition would take account 
of  competition,  non-competition,  unfair  trading  practices,  consumer  protection  and  data 
privacy aspects of the DSA prohibitions and obligations list. 

The co-operation between the European Commission and the national enforcement bodies 
could  take  inspiration  from  the  ECN  principles  of  case  allocation  (Commission  Notice  on 

13 Phishing is defined as the deliberate exploitation of information deficits and behavioural biases, and sludging 
the deliberate addition of frictions and hassles to make it harder to make good choices. 
14 See: Behavioural Insights Team, “The behavioural science of online harm and manipulation, and what to do 
about it”, available at  https://www.bi.team/wp-content/uploads/2019/04/BIT_The-behavioural-science-of-
online-harm-and-manipulation-and-what-to-do-about-it_Single.pdf  
15 Rather than as presently, exploiting recognised consumer behavioural biases to lock-in consumers. 

8 

 
 
 
 
 
cooperation within the Network of Competition Authorities16). The European Commission 
would in principle take any necessary enforcement decisions with respect to infringements 
of  obligations  or  prohibitions  in  the  DSA  list,  given  the  inherent  cross-border  nature  of 
platform conduct, unless another authority was better placed to do so in a particular case. 

The European Commission would need to be given appropriate and deterrent powers to 
remedy and sanction any failure by gatekeepers to comply with the DSA prohibitions and 
obligations list. These powers could be modelled on competition law powers.17 

This approach would have the following merits: 

•  No major and lengthy (and thus harmful) institutional set up would be required. 
•  The Commission could call on existing experienced staff and so could be operational 

immediately. 

•  The  risk  of  inconsistencies  at  Member  State  level  and  consequential  legal 
uncertainty would be avoided through the co-ordinating role of the Commission. 
•  Forum  shopping  by  platforms  would  be  excluded  and  maximum  regulatory 

independence ensured. 

•  The Commission could also identify situations which should be addressed under the 
NCT18  due  to  the  structural  nature  of  the  market  problems,  thereby  avoiding 
inconsistencies of application and enforcement between the two instruments. This 
approach would also maximise the synergies, using NCT findings to update ex ante 
regulation  to  make  sure  it  reflects  current  market  and  business  realities  both  in 
terms  of  the  identity  of  the  gatekeepers  subject  to  regulation  and  the  DSA 
prohibitions and obligations list. 

•  Potential case by case obligations to be dealt in the context of the NCT and 

existing competition law could include: 

o  Mandating  access  to  data  where  this  is  a  barrier  to  market  entry,  in  full 

compliance with the GDPR. 

o  Access to other inputs/services19 or requirements to deal. 
o  Mandating interoperability and access to Application Programming Interfaces 
when  this  is  needed  to  tackle  structural  markets  problems.  Where 
interoperability is needed to  attain non-competition objectives (e.g. media 
pluralism regarding social media), it could be dealt with by means of sectoral 
legislation.   

o  Giving  consumers  control  (choice)  over  data  use,  sharing  and  mobility, 
including  additional  obligations  to  facilitate  the  portability  of  personal  and 
non-personal data between service providers20. 

o  Data  separation  within  ecosystems  (for  example  where  data  has  been 

collected through the leveraging of market power).  

16 Commission Notice on cooperation within the Network of Competition Authorities (2004/C 101/03), available   
at   https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/PDF/?uri=CELEX:52004XC0427(02)&from=EN  
17 I.e. as under Council Regulation (EC) No 1/2003 of 16 December 2002 on the implementation of the rules on 
competition laid down in Articles 81 and 82 of the Treaty (Regulation 1/2003), including remedies to end the 
unlawful behaviour and its effects, interim measures, fines and periodic penalty payments. 
18 Where necessary with input/participation of other sectoral specialists outside of digital markets. 
19 Inspiration could be drawn from existing legislation such as the Payment Services Directive, the Type 
Approval Regulation and the new Electricity Directive, i.e.  Directive  (EU)  2015/2366  of  the  European  
Parliament  and  of  the  Council  of  25  November  2015  on  payment  services in the internal market;  
Commission  Regulation  (EU)  2017/1151  of  1  June  2017  supplementing  Regulation  (EC)  No  715/2007  
of  the  European Parliament and of the Council on type-approval of motor vehicles with respect to emissions 
from light passenger  and  commercial  vehicles  (Euro  5  and  Euro  6)  and  on  access  to  vehicle  repair  
and  maintenance  information; and Directive (EU) 2019/944 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 
5 June 2019 on common rules for the internal market for electricity. 
20 BEUC submission on a European Strategy for Data, available at http://www.beuc.eu/publications/beuc-x-
2020-046_a_european_strategy_for_data_-_beucs_response_to_public_consultation.pdf 

9 

 
 
 
 
o  Mandating consumer choice, e.g. via carefully designed choice 

architecture. 

o  Unbundling of services.  
o  Transparency requirements in relation to how platforms make decisions in, 
for  example,  rankings,  auction  processes  or  other  competitive  parameters 
(using AI or otherwise,) which affect users (businesses and consumers). 

o  Structural remedies, including divestiture. 
o  Obligation to deal fairly with trading partners in specified areas in order to 
preclude  discrimination,  forced  data  sharing,  withholding  of  data  from 
business  users,  unfair  terms  and  conditions  in  relation  to,  for  example, 
payment terms, liability, rights assignments, etc21. 

•  DG  Competition  is  highly  experienced  in  the  types  of  procedures  and  processes 
which  will  be  required,  including  interim  measures,  evidentiary  standards  and 
respect for due process. 

•  The Commission would most easily be able to facilitate EU wide cooperation with 

extra-EU jurisdictions. 

It would be essential for the Commission to ensure that it has sufficient financial, human 
and technical resources and competence to carry out this new task. 

Where  gatekeepers  fail  to  comply  with  ex  ante  regulation,  these  could  be  enforced  in 
national courts in private actions by legitimate parties in addition to enforcement by the 
Commission  where  appropriate.  At  the  same  time,  mechanisms  should  be  foreseen  to 
enable  effective redress/compensation for  those harmed by such non-compliance, 
be  they  consumers  (including  their  representative  organisations),  competitors  or  other 
market participants. Inspiration could be drawn from Article 14 of the P2B Regulation. 

Conclusion 

BEUC  favours  an  asymmetric  ex  ante  regulatory  framework  for  large  online 
platforms  acting  as  gatekeepers.  We  consider  that  establishing  a  DSA 
prohibitions and obligations list, with a procedure to update it to keep abreast of 
new market developments, would be the most appropriate approach in terms  not  
only    of    legal    certainty    but    also,    and    most    fundamentally,    to    ensure    an  
immediate  effect  in  the  market  to the  benefit  of  consumers.  It is important, 
however, to highlight that such a list should  be  accompanied  not only  by more 
vigorous  antitrust  enforcement  against  dominant  platforms  under  existing  law 
but also by market investigations and, where necessary, case by case remedies 
under a NCT. 

New Competition Tool (NCT) 

Market structure characteristics in the digital sector enable large platforms to act in ways 
that can significantly harm competition, innovation and ultimately consumers.  Distinctions 
between  digital  and  non-digital  markets  are  blurring.  The  Internet  of  Things,  connected 
cars, digital assistants and wearables are examples of this. The scope of potential market 
structure problems is therefore expanding.   

10 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Whilst existing competition rules must be actively used to deal with illegal behaviour by 
market  players,  given  the  specific  new  structural  competition  challenges  in  digital  and 
related  markets  and  wide-ranging  self-reinforcing  concerns  (for  example,  concentration 
levels, vertical integration and dual roles, network effects, extreme economies of scale and 
scope, switching costs, “zero” pricing and the importance of data and algorithms, including 
pricing algorithms), which significantly hamper new market entry and the development of 
incumbents’ smaller rivals, these rules are not suited to effectively address all problems. 
Examples  of  problematic  conduct  which  cannot  be  effectively  tackled  under  Articles  101 
and 102 TFEU include monopolisation strategies by non-dominant companies with market 
power  or  parallel  leveraging  strategies  by  dominant  companies  into  multiple  adjacent 
markets, thereby tipping markets in their favour. This conduct can lead to consumer harms 
in the form of higher prices, lower quality, less choice and innovation. Furthermore, Articles 
101 and 102 TFEU (and merger control) are primarily focused on preventing competition 
from declining. The market structure characteristics or features of some markets however 
can mean that there  is  a need to proactively  promote increased competition.22 A NCT is 
therefore necessary at EU level23 to deal with both problematic conduct and problematic 
structures  or  features  as  such  and  open  up  the  potential  for  disruptive  and  innovative 
competition from new technologies and business models. 

As  regards  the  scope  of  an  NCT,  BEUC  would  favour  a  market  structure-based 
competition  tool  with  a  horizontal  scope  (Option  3  in  the  NCT  Inception  Impact 
Assessment).  

Whilst  the  most  obvious  structural  competition  problems  are  currently  seen  in  digital 
markets, if such a new  tool were to be established by legislation, it would be unwise to 
limit its scope to selected sectors only (Options 2/4) given the blurring of lines between 
digital and non-digital markets. Furthermore, as it is not possible to predict which sectors 
will raise structural competition concerns in the future, it would be advisable to have the 
flexibility to use it in other sectors, subject to appropriate safeguards. Other sectors such 
as financial services (including payments), energy, healthcare/pharma and transport have 
demonstrated structural problems in the past. The UK’s CMA, for example, has carried out 
19 market investigations and over 50 market studies in the last 18 years, the majority of 
which did not relate to digital markets.24 

As regards whether the tool should be market structure-based or only dominance-based 
(Option 1), BEUC considers that a market structure-based model is more appropriate. By 
this we understand market structure in the broadest sense, including not only supply-side 
but also demand-side issues.  

Many markets, including digital markets, are not necessarily only characterised by single 
company dominance but also by  particular  features or  combinations of features  such as 
high concentration levels, vertical integration and the development of ecosystem models, 
or the presence of powerful actors acting in several markets making oligopolistic and tacit 
collusion  scenarios  more  relevant.  Markets  may  be  characterised  by  other  factors  that 
hinder competition such as structural barriers or consumer behavioural factors. Companies 
can hinder competition by exploiting behavioural biases or distorting consumer decision-
making through, for example, not providing clear and comparable information, refusing to 
deal  with  price  comparison  website  services,  engaging  in  the  use  of  dark  patterns  as 

22 The NCT could, as is the case for the UK Market Investigation Tool “address markets which can have become 
‘stuck’ in bad equilibria, which are good for neither firms nor society, but where some form of intervention is 
required to make the shift to a better equilibrium”, Amelia Fletcher, Market Investigations for Digital Platforms: 
Panacea or Complement? p.3, available at: https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3668289 
23 BEUC,  “The  Role  of  Competition  Policy  in  Protecting  Consumers’  Wellbeing  in  the  Digital  Era”,  
available at http://www.beuc.eu/publications/beuc-x-2019-054_competition_policy_in_digital_markets.pdf 
24 See the UK Enterprise Act Market Investigation Tool in the UK, available at 
https://www.gov.uk/topc/competition/markets.  

11 

 
 
 
 
 
 
described by our Norwegian member Forbrukerrådet in its report “Deceived by design”25 
or imposing on consumers contractual terms that make switching costly or cumbersome. 
This can have significant implications for competition, even in relatively non-concentrated 
markets.26 

Tools exist in other jurisdictions to deal with situations where it is the structure or features 
of  the  market  itself,  and  not  only  the  conduct  of  powerful  individual  players,  that  harm 
competition,  for  example  Market  Studies/Investigations  in  the  UK.  These  have  led  to 
effective  forward-looking  industry-wide  remedies,  such  as  facilitating  easy  switching  by 
consumers, creating the conditions for choice of new services to enter the market as was 
the case with open banking, in addition to remedies related only to the conduct of individual 
companies.  

Furthermore, if the NCT were only to be dominance-based this would suggest a potentially 
significant  overlap  with  Article  102  enforcement.  If  so,  what  would  be  the  basis  to 
determine which tool were used? The advantages of an NCT based solely on dominance, 
leaving  aside  the  absence  of  an  infringement  finding,  would  not  appear  to  be  radically 
broader  in  terms  of  potential  market  outcomes  than  existing  options  in  terms  of 
commitments and settlement decisions under Article 102. A broader tool by contrast would 
lend  itself  better  to  preventing  markets  from  tipping  and  to  considering  more  recent 
developments  such  as  tacit  collusion  through  the  use  of  algorithms  and  potential 
anticompetitive effects of common ownership across sectors (institutional investors owning 
non-controlling stakes in direct competitors). It would also be more useful in keeping any 
ex ante regulation relevant in the future.  

Such  a  tool  would  be  appropriate  at  EU  level  in  coordination  with  National 
Competition Authorities who may have, or may be introducing, complementary tools in 
their markets. This is because the current trend is that many markets are becoming pan-
European,  if  not  global.    Any  remedies  would  therefore  be  most  appropriate  at  EU  or 
international  level.  The  confusion  and  legal  uncertainty  that  have  arisen  because  of 
differing  analysis  between  Member  States  on  issues  arising  in  digital  markets  are  not 
helpful,  neither  for  consumers  nor  for  internationally  operating  businesses.    Examples 
include  the  booking.com  antitrust  cases  involving  the  use  of  parity  clauses  preventing 
hotels from offering cheaper prices outside Booking.com27 or Coty28 on vertical restrictions 
to sell “luxury” products on third-party platforms such as Amazon. 

Where  Member  States  and  the  European  Commission  are  considering  opening 
investigations  into  the  same  market,  a  coordination  mechanism  as  under  the 
Commission  Notice  on  cooperation  within  the  Network  of  Competition  Authorities in 
relation to Article 101 an 102 TFEU, would be advisable to prevent duplicate investigations 
which would waste both public and private resources and potentially lead to inconsistent 
outcomes.  

For the NCT to function effectively and lead to the right outcomes, it would be essential to 
ensure that appropriate and transparent procedures as well as robust governance 
provisions are set up in this instrument.  The NCT  could take inspiration from the CMA’s 
market investigation tool. The following points should be considered: 

25 Forbrukerrådet, “Deceived by design: How tech companies use dark patterns to discourage us from 
exercising our rights to privacy”, available at https://fil.forbrukerradet.no/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/2018-
06-27-deceived-by-design-final.pdf  
26 Amelia Fletcher, Market Investigations for Digital Platforms: Panacea or Complement? p.4, available at: 
https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3668289 
27 For an overview of the national cases against Booking.com see: Ariel Ezrachi, “The Competitive Effect of 
Parity Clauses on   Online   Commerce”, Oxford   Legal   Studies   Research   Paper   No.   55/2015, available   
at https://ssrn.com/abstract=2672541 
28 Judgment of the Court of 6 December 2017, C-230/16, Coty Germany GmbH v Parfümerie Akzente GmbH, 
ECLI:EU:C:2017:941 

12 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
•  Establishment  of  transparent  and  predictable  criteria  and  procedures  for 
monitoring markets and determining when (i.e. the legal threshold) to use the NCT 
and when to rely on antitrust enforcement under Articles 101 and 102 TFEU (and 
the exclusion of both being used for the same issue). 

•  Systematic  involvement  of  consumer  organisations  in  the  identification  of 
problematic  market  structures,  demand-side  failures29  and  practices  that  are 
harmful to consumers. 

•  DG Competition should have the same (or equivalent) set of investigative 
and  procedural  tools  as  under  Regulation  1/2003  (including  interim  measures, 
commitment decisions, structural/behavioural/hybrid remedies) except for: 

o 
o 

the finding of an infringement 
the ability to impose fines (except for procedural infringements and periodic 
penalty  payments  for  failure  to  comply  with  investigative  measures  or 
decisions and remedies). 

With the additional ability to: 

o 

inform and make legislative recommendations, in particular in relation to ex 
ante  regulation  (identity  of  gatekeepers  and  the  contents  of  the  DSA 
prohibitions and obligations list). 

And the obligation to: 

o  conclude  investigations  and  the  imposition  of  any  remedies  or  other 

measures where appropriate within legally binding deadlines  

o  consult  all  relevant  market  participants, 

including  consumer 

organisations, on the proposed remedies/other measures. 

•  Companies and other parties, including consumers, should have equivalent rights 
of  defence  and  due  process  to  those  under  Regulation  1/2003  and 
additional  opportunities  to  comment  at  key  stages.  Here  in  particular  the 
participative  approach  of  the  CMA’s  market  investigation  tool  could  serve  as  a 
model. Parties should also have corresponding rights of appeal to the Court of 
Justice of the European Union. 

•  The  Commission  should  make  the  standard  of  proof  for  the  identification  of  a 
competition problem and the imposition of remedial actions clear. This should be a 
lower standard than for an infringement decision under Article 101/2, for example, 
an adverse effect on competition, given that the absence of a fine and no finding of 
liability would mean no quasi-criminal liability for companies. 

•  The burden of proof should remain with the Commission, i.e. be equivalent 
to  Article  2  Regulation  1/2003.  This  should  apply  both  to  the  identification  of  a 
competition problem and the likelihood of intervention remediating this problem. 
•  Dissuasive, effective and proportionate remedies should be identified early in 
the  investigative  process  and,  if  considered  necessary  at  the  end  of  the 
investigation, thoroughly market tested (regardless of whether these are imposed 
by decision or the result of commitments, are market-wide or imposed on specific 
market  players).  Remedies  could  be  on  the  supply-side,  for  example  to  open  up 
monopolies,  otherwise  enhance  competition  or  prevent  tipping  and/or  on  the 
demand side. As regards the latter, they could, where appropriate, target the types 
of consumer behavioural biases and decision-making issues mentioned above. Such 
remedies  could  include  disclosure  and  presentational  requirements  to  improve 
decision-making, including appropriate choice architecture and “fairness by design” 

29 As under the UK Enterprise Act Market Studies and Investigations regime. See 
https://www.gov.uk/topic/competition/markets 

13 

 
 
 
and  limit  the  effects  of  behavioural  biases,  facilitating  consumer  search  and 
switching  and  protecting  consumers  against  unfair  commercial  practices. 
Consumer-facing  remedies  should  be  tested  with  consumers  to  identify  whether 
their  design  has  successfully  taken  into  account  actual  consumer  behaviour.  This 
can be done through qualitative research, surveys, experiments in laboratory, field 
trial  settings  and  pilot  testing  and  would  require  sufficient  timelines  and  the 
necessary expertise. DG Competition could for example benefit from the expertise 
on behavioural testing of the Joint Research Centre or even include a behavioural 
unit in the team of the Chief Economist. 

•  Remedies  imposed  could  take  inspiration  from  and  should  be  consistent 
with ex ante regulation (see above). It is essential that remedies resulting from 
any NCT (or case by case ex ante regulation) are well designed to undo the harm 
identified without risking negative impacts on innovation that benefits consumers. 
•  Remedies  should  also  foresee  the  ability  to  adjust  them.  This  will  be 

particularly important in dynamic markets. 

•  Finally,  remedies  need  to  be  enforced  and  regularly  monitored.  Monitoring 
would allow remedies to be refined if they were not working, or terminated if they 
were  no  longer  necessary.  This  will  require  resources  and  expertise.  Sectoral 
regulators may be well placed to assist in this. Remedies should also be subject to 
systematic  post-evaluation  of  their  effectiveness  to  learn  lessons  for  future 
remedies. 

•  Given  the  potentially  far-reaching  effects  of  this  tool,  mechanisms  should  be 
considered to ensure robust governance and strong checks and balances for 
the NCT, including the directorate/unit carrying out the investigation being different 
from the one deciding on, designing and enforcing the remedies. 

•  DG Competition should have the financial, human and technical resources to 

effectively implement the NCT. 

Due  process,  but  without  unnecessary  delays,  would  be  essential  to  reach  the  right 
outcomes for consumers. Where final decisions have been made, should companies fail to 
comply, mechanisms should be foreseen to enable effective redress/compensation for 
those  harmed  by  non-compliance,  be  they  consumers,  competitors  or  other  market 
participants. 

Conclusion 

The European Commission (DG Competition) should have additional powers in its 
toolbox to carry-out market investigations, even in the absence of dominance by 
a single player, to deal with structural, including demand-side competition issues. 
BEUC  therefore  favours  a  market  structure-based  competition  tool  with  a 
horizontal scope, which would allow the Commission to impose behavioural and, 
where appropriate, structural remedies   to improve the functioning of markets 
to the benefit of consumers, independently of the finding of an infringement of 
Article 101 or 102 TFEU. 

14 

 
 
 
 
 
 
This publication is part of an activity which has received funding under an operating grant 
from the European Union’s Consumer Programme (2014-2020). 

The  content  of  this  publication  represents  the  views  of  the  author  only  and  it  is  his/her  sole 
responsibility; it cannot be considered to reflect the views of the European Commission and/or 
the  Consumers,  Health,  Agriculture  and  Food  Executive  Agency  or  any  other  body  of  the 
European Union. The European Commission and the Agency do not accept any responsibility for 
use that may be made of the information it contains. 

15 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
