Ref. Ares(2020)4689600 - 08/09/2020

September 8, 2020 

European Commission’s public consultation on the proposed New Competition Tool 

Position paper by the Italian Association of European Jurists (Associazione Italiana 
Giuristi Europei) 

The  Italian  Association  of  European  Jurists  (Associazione  Italiana  Giuristi  Europei, 
“AIGE”), welcomes the opportunity to participate in the public consultation process launched 
by  the  European  Commission  (the  “Commission”)  on  a  proposed  New  Competition  Tool, 
providing feedback and responding to the related questionnaire.  

Established in 1958, AIGE is affiliated to the International Federation for European Law 
(Fédération Internationale pour le Droit Européen, “FIDE”) and, in accordance with its Statute, 
promotes knowledge of European Union law through conferences, debates, cultural, training, 
and research activities, also developing international relations with similar associations.1 

AIGE’s  members  include  law  professors,  judges,  lawyers  and  legal  practitioners  in 
general who wish to deepen and contribute to the knowledge and development of European 
Union law.   

The  opinions  expressed  herewith  are  attributable  to  AIGE  only  and  do  not  bind  the 

individual members in relation to any positions held by them. 

1.  INTRODUCTION 

We refer to the public consultation that the Commission launched on 2 June 2020 on a 
proposed New Competition Tool (“NCT”).2  According to the Inception Impact Assessment 
(the  “Commission’s  NCT  Impact  Assessment”)  published  by  the  Commission,  the  NCT  is 
aimed  at  addressing  purported  “gaps  in  the  current  EU  competition  rules  and  allowing  for 
timely  and  effective  intervention  against  structural  competition  problems  across  markets.”3  
The Commission’s NCT Impact Assessment differentiates between two forms of “structural 
competition problems” depending on whether harm is about to affect or has already affected 
the market:4 

(i) 

Structural risks for competition. Scenarios where certain market characteristics (e.g. 
network  and  lock-in  effects)  and  the  conduct  of  the  companies  operating  in  the 
markets concerned create a threat for competition (e.g., markets perceived as prone 
to ‘tipping’); and 

1  
2  

3  
4  

Further information on AIGE is available on its website: https://www.aige.it/. 
Commission,  Proposal  for  a  Regulation:  Single  Market  –  new  complementary  tool  to  strengthen 
competition enforcement, 2 June 2020, available at: https://ec.europa.eu/info/law/better-regulation/have-
your-say/initiatives/12416-New-competition-tool  
Commission’s NCT Impact Assessment, 4 June 2020, Section A. 
Ibid. 

 
 
                                                 
(ii) 

Structural lack of competition. Scenarios where a market is not working well and 
not delivering outcomes due to its structure (e.g., an oligopolistic market structure 
with an increased risk of tacit collusion). 

Although the Commission’s NCT proposal was announced along with the Commission’s 
Digital Services Act (“DSA”) package,5 its scope is not limited to digital or digitally enabled 
markets.  The NCT proposal envisages a significant expansion of the Commission’s existing 
powers, including potentially the power to impose extensive behavioral and structural remedies 
absent  an  infringement  decision.    Against  this  background,  the  introduction  of  the  NCT  is 
bound to have far-reaching implications – far beyond those of established investigation and 
sector  inquiry  tools  –  and  is  likely  to  result  in  a  paradigm  shift  in  EU  competition  law 
enforcement. 

AIGE’s preliminary comments relating to the NCT concern: the questionability of the 
need for a new tool in light of the sufficiency of the existing competition rules (Section 2); the 
need for appropriate checks and balances (Section 3); the need for clear legal and evidentiary 
standards for the imposition of remedies and for robust effects-based analysis (Section 4); and 
the risk of proliferation of overlapping enforcement tools (Section 5). 

As the NCT draft text is not available, AIGE’s specific comments are necessarily limited 
to the Commission’s NCT Impact Assessment and the Questionnaire for the public consultation 
on the NCT (the “NCT Questionnaire”).  These documents identify a range of policy measures 
that  express  the  Commission’s  intention  to  address  concerns  about  the  operation  of  digital 
markets and the Commission’s ability to intervene.  AIGE looks forward to expanding on these 
ideas  and  continuing  to  engage  on  these  important  and  timely  topics  as  the  Commission 
advances a draft text of the NCT.  

2.  THE NEED FOR A NEW TOOL  

The  Commission’s  Impact  Assessment  asserts  that  the  NCT  is  intended  to  address 
“structural competition problems” that Articles 101 and 102 of the Treaty on the Functioning 
of the European Union (the “TFEU”) “cannot tackle (e.g. monopolization strategies by non-
dominant companies with market power) or cannot address in the most effective manner (e.g. 
parallel leveraging strategies by dominant companies into multiple adjacent markets).”6  It is 
therefore paramount to assess whether or not the NCT is actually needed and, if it is, to consider 
carefully any potential ‘gap-cases’ that cannot be effectively addressed by existing rules.  

On this point, the Commission refers to the current debate on the potential need to expand 
the  Commission’s  current  toolkit  in  order  to  capture  potential  established  forms  of  anti-

5  

6  

large  online  platforms  acting  as  gatekeepers,  2 

Commission, Proposal for a Regulation: Digital Services Act package – ex ante regulatory instrument 
June  2020,  available  at: 
of  very 
https://ec.europa.eu/info/law/better- 
regulation/have-your-say/initiatives/12418-Digital-Services-Act-
package-ex-ante-regulatory-instrument-of-very-large-online-platforms-acting-as-gatekeepers 
Commission’s NCT Impact Assessment, 4 June 2020, Section A. 

2 

 
 
                                                 
competitive conduct that allegedly fall within a gap in the law,7 and it acknowledges that no 
clear consensus has been  established in this regard.8   

As a general remark we believe that past cases demonstrate that Articles 101 and 102 
TFEU  have  proven  to  be  sufficiently  broad  and  flexible to tackle  a  wide  range  of  new  and 
sophisticated economic phenomena that have informed competition analysis and policy in the 
last fifty years.  This is also the case with regard to the competition challenges that may arise 
in relation to the digitization of the economy, such as two-sided markets, zero-price factors, 
and innovation theories of harm, as emphasized by Commission Vice President Vestager.9  

In particular, the existing competition law framework has proven extremely flexible in 
refining the notion of ‘relevant market’ in sectors characterized by the emergence of data as 
an asset for market players operating in the digital economy: instead of simply relying on 
market shares, the Commission is increasingly taking into account ‘potential competition’ in 
its assessment of dominance in dynamic markets.  This notion is particularly valuable because 
it  highlights  that  potential  competition  may  serve  as  a  disciplining  device  for  dominant 
firms.10  

For  example,  in  relevant  markets  defined  around  data,  it  is  essential  to  identify  an 
objective criterion to attribute value to data. The turnover generated by a provider through the 
monetization of data, by licensing information to third parties, delivering targeted advertising 
services or offering other paid products and services to customers on the basis of the collected 
data,  may  provide  an  indication  of  its  competitive  strength  in  a  potential  market  for  a 
particular  type  of  data.  Lacking  any  data-related  revenues,  ‘potential  competition’  may 
represent an additional proxy to evaluate market power or even dominance. This enables the 
Commission (and the CJEU) to assess a form of rivalry whereby market players do not only 
compete  in  existing  relevant  markets  for  end  products  or  services  but  also  in  a  potential 
market for data used as an input to launch innovative future products and services.11 

Along these lines, in its Microsoft/Skype merger decision, the Commission contended 
that market shares only offer an incomplete indication of competitive strength in the context 
of the market for internet consumer communications services because of the dynamism of the 
sector as a result of which market shares can change quickly within a short period of time.12  

7  

8  
9  

10  

11  
12  

The Commission’s Special Advisers’ Report was a useful contribution to this debate. See Jacques Crémer, 
Yves-Alexandre de Montjoye and Heike Schweitzer, Competition policy for the digital era, 4 April 2019, 
available at: https://ec.europa.eu/competition/publications/reports/kd0419345enn.pdf  
Commission’s NCT Impact Assessment, 4 June 2020, Section A. 
See the  statement  of Executive  Vice  President  Vestager  which  underlined  the  sufficiency  of  existing 
enforcement  tools  in  a  recent  speech,  noting:  ‘that’s  not  to  say  that  we  need fundamental changes 
to the rules themselves. […] The fundamental motives, like greed and fear, that tempt companies to harm 
competition are the same as they’ve ever been – and the competition rules are still well designed to deal 
with them’. Executive Vice President Vestager speech, Defining markets in a new age, 9 December 2019, 
available 
https://ec.europa.eu/commission/commissioners/2019-
2024/vestager/announcements/defining-markets-new-age_en  
See generally, I. Graef, Market Definition and Market Power in Data: The Case of Online Platforms, 
World Competition Law and Economics Review, 2015, Volume 38 Issue 4, pp. 473 – 506. 
Ibid.. 
Case No COMP/M.6281 – Microsoft/Skype, Commission Decision of 7 October 2011, para. 78. 

at: 

3 

 
 
                                                 
In its Cisco judgment – in which the legality of the decision of the Commission to approve 
the Microsoft/Skype merger was evaluated – the General Court confirmed this finding of the 
Commission and held that “the consumer communications sector is a recent and fast-growing 
sector which is characterized by short innovation cycles in which large market shares may 
turn  out  to  be  ephemeral”.13   The  Commission  and  the  General  Court  concluded  that  the 
concentration would not raise competition concerns because of the dynamic character of the 
sector and the existence of sufficient alternative providers to which consumers could easily 
switch.14  In its Facebook/WhatsApp merger decision, the Commission referred to and relied 
upon  the  statement  of  the  General  Court  that  high  market  shares  do  not  necessarily  point 
towards market power in the market for consumer communications services.15   

Arguably, an analogous reasoning may be applied in prospective matters concerning 

online platforms, e.g.  e-commerce platforms, social networks, and search engines.16 

Additionally, the existing competition law regime has successfully stood the test of time 
in relation to the notion of dominance.  In particular, to the extent that the proposed NCT would 
apply  to  unilateral  conduct,  no  evidence  that  existing  competition  law  tools  are  unable  to 
address  these  issues  can  be  detected  at  all.    EU  competition  law  currently  bestows  the 
Commission  with  clear  powers  to  tackle  two  distinct  scenarios:  agreements  and  concerted 
practices between independent undertakings (Article 101 TFEU), and unilateral conduct which 
may be caught by Article 102 TFEU.  The case-law developed by the Court of Justice of the 
EU (the “CJEU”) has consistently held that unilateral conduct only falls within the scope of 
EU competition law if the company at issue is dominant.17  To date, there has been no evidence-
based claim that the EU competition law framework allows for a significant enforcement gap 
with respect to anti-competitive unilateral conduct.  

The Commission’s decision-making practice and the CJEU case law demonstrates that 
the  current  framework  for  EU  competition  law  enforcement  is  flexible  enough  to  address 
novel  theories  of  harm,  including  new  leveraging  strategies  (i.e.  better  positioning  and 

13  

14  

15  
16  

17  

Judgment  in  Case  T-79/12,  Cisco  Systems  Inc.  and  Messagenet  SpA  v.  Commission  [2013],  not  yet 
reported, para. 69. 
Case No COMP/M.6281 – Microsoft/Skype, Commission Decision of 7 October 2011, paras 120-132 
and Judgment in Case T-79/12, Cisco Systems Inc. and Messagenet SpA v. Commission [2013], not yet 
reported, paras 68-95.  
Case No COMP/M.7217 – Facebook/WhatsApp, Commission Decision of 3 October 2014, para. 99. 
See generally, I. Graef, Market Definition and Market Power in Data: The Case of Online Platforms, 
World Competition Law and Economics Review, 2015, Volume 38 Issue 4, pp. 473 – 506. 
Joined Cases C-2/01 P and C-3/01 P, BAI and Commission v Bayer, paras. 100-101 (“the existence of an 
agreement [prohibited by Article 101(1) TFEU] […] can be deduced from the conduct of the parties 
concerned. However, such an agreement cannot be based on what is only the expression of a unilateral 
policy of one of the contracting parties, which can be put into effect without the assistance of others […] 
[this] would have the effect of confusing the scope of that provision with that of Article [102 TFEU].”). 
On this point, it should be remarked that there are solid legal and economic reasons why Article 102 
TFEU primarily focuses on actual or potential harm caused by specific ongoing practices by dominant 
firms:  (i)  competition  law  recognizes  that  acquiring  a  dominant  position  can  be  the  consequence  of 
significant investments and innovative behavior, a reflection of the efficiencies, and value created and 
shared with business partners and consumers; and (ii) undertakings in a dominant position can behave 
independently of consumers and competitors and can as a result dictate the limits of competition. 

4 

 
 
                                                 
display); 18  pre-installation  through,  e.g.,  tying; 19  exclusivity  requirements; 20  and,  most-
favored-nation clauses.21  These precedents show that Article 102 TFEU already allows to 
carry out a nuanced and evidence-based assessment, centered on the dominance framework. 
Article 102 TFEU is enforced case-by-case, based on a careful valuation of the facts, and the 
requirement to find an infringement guarantees that obligations to change market conduct are 
grounded on established legal principles and thorough scrutiny.  Indeed, under Article 17 of 
Regulation 1/2003, the Commission must initiate antitrust investigations in order to address 
findings in a sector inquiry that competition in a particular sector is not functioning well. 

The  Commission’s  NCT  Impact  Assessment  asserts  that  the  proposed  NCT  would 
allow the Commission to address alleged structural market failures, or risks for competition 
– in particular in ‘tipping markets’ – that despite being anticompetitive, do not amount to an 
infringement of the current EU competition rules, and therefore cannot be tackled relying on 
the  existing  competition  law  regime,  because  no  market  dominance  can  be  established. 
However, this assertion is questionable:  

(i) 

(ii) 

first,  dominance  has  been  interpreted  elastically  and  more  widely  than  the 
Commission’s  NCT  Impact  Assessment  suggests:  the  thresholds  used  to  find 
dominance are roughly those that are used under US antitrust law to run a case of 
attempted monopolization under section 2 of the US Sherman Act, because under 
the EU system, Article 102 TFEU applies to firms with the power to exclude, and 
not just those who have the power to exploit;  
second,  Article  102  TFEU  can  and  has  previously  effectively  been  applied  to 
instances of economic dependency or relative market power (e.g. see cases C-26/75, 
General Motors Continental NV v Commission and C-241/91 P and C-242/91 P, 
Magill). 

Moreover,  the  Commission  does  not  seem  to  offer  in  its  proposed  NCT  concrete 
evidence of specific situations where existing competition law tools do not suffice. While we 
are  aware  that  the  consultation  documents  are  preliminary  and  we  are  confident  that  the 
Commission will spell out these specific situations in a future draft text of the NCT, it is worth 
noticing that the Commission’s NCT Impact Assessment lists several types of conduct that 
are  already  captured  under  Article  102  TFEU,  when  engaged  in  by  dominant  companies. 
Given that such evidence is essential in order to demonstrate the need for and the scope of 
any new enforcement tool, the Commission’s assessment is a particularly speculative basis 
for the introduction of a new tool.  In particular, there is a lack of compelling evidence to 
demonstrate  that  the  existing  competition  rules  and  instruments  cannot  efficiently  address 
legitimate  competition  concerns,  or  that  these  cannot  be  reviewed  accordingly.    The 
establishment of the NCT is therefore disproportionate.  

18  
19  

20  

21  

Case AT. 39740 – Google Search (Shopping), Commission Decision of 27 June 2017. 
Case  AT.40099  –  Google  Android,  Commission  Decision  of  18  July  2018;  Case  M.8124  – 
Microsoft/LinkedIn, Commission Decision of 6 December 2016. 
Case AT.40099 – Google Android, Commission Decision of 18 July 2018; Case AT. 40411 – Google 
AdSense (Commission decision not yet published). 
Case AT.40153 – E-book MFNs and related matters (Amazon), Commission Decision of 4 May 2017. 

5 

 
 
                                                 
Irrespective  of  the  final  language  of  the  NCT,  and  assuming  it  will  be  adopted,  the 
principle  of  proportionality  should  be  the  cornerstone  of  this  new  enforcement  tool,  as  it 
represents  the  principle  “which  has  most  influenced  the  development  of  public  law  across 
Europe”.22  It applies to most, if not all, actions taken by the Union, and constitutes a ground 
for review of EU acts,23 as well as of acts by Member States within the scope of EU law,24 
stemming from the common traditions of the Member States.25  

In particular, in identifying specific situations where current competition tools do not  
– allegedly – suffice, the Commission should build on the principle of proportionality as it 
takes the role of a safeguard against the use of public powers in the system of competition in 
the EU, by imposing limitations and procedural requirements upon competition authorities, 
including the Commission.  Therefore, any measures introduced by the NCT should be fully 
aligned with proportionality, which typically entails that (i) a legitimate objective is being 
pursued by the measure concerned, and that the measure itself is i(i) suitable, (iii) necessary, 
and (iv) proportional stricto sensu to achieve the objective.26   

On a different note, the NCT also seems to suggest that the current competition law 
framework does not provide a sound and sufficiently flexible basis for protecting competition 
vis-à-vis  potential  competition  concerns  stemming  from  the  widespread  use  of  pricing 
algorithms in the digital ecosystem. 

Conversely, we  believe that the contemporary  legal framework,  in particular Art. 101 
TFEU  and  its  accompanying  jurisprudence,  allows  competition  authorities  to  efficiently 
address possible competitive concerns.  In fact, competition authorities already have dealt with 
a  certain  spectrum  of  cases  involving  algorithms,  which  have  not  raised  specific  legal 
difficulties.  Three different scenarios can be envisaged:27  

(i) 

(ii) 

in the first scenario, pricing algorithms are used as mere facilitators of collusive 
agreements that occur in person.  In this case, the involvement of an algorithm does 
not raise specific concerns, as a prior agreement or concerted practice exists which 
may  be  assessed  under  Article  101  without  requiring  further  analysis  of  the 
algorithm; 
in the second scenario, a third party provides market operators with an algorithm 
that facilitates similar behaviors between competitors.  In this case, the third party’s 
role might be assessed under the “hub and spoke” doctrine; 

22  

23  
24  
25  

26  
27  

See  A.  Young  and  G.  de  Burca,  Proportionality,  in  S.  Vogenauer  and  S.  Weatherill  (eds),  General 
Principles of Law: European and Comparative Perspectives (Hart 2017), p. 133. 
T. Tridimas, The General Principles of EC Law (OUP 1999), p. 90. 
Id., p. 124. 
W. Sauter, Proportionality in EU Law: A Balancing Act?, (2013) 15 Cambridge Yearbook of European 
Legal Studies, p. 442; Tor-Inge Harbo, The Function of the Proportionality Principle in EU Law (2010) 
16(2) European Law Journal, p. 159. 
P. Craig and G. de Burca, EU Law: Text Cases and Materials (5th edn OUP 2011), p. 526. 
On this point, see Joint study on “Algorithms and Competition” by the Autorité de la concurrence and 
the Bundeskartellam, November 2019, pp. 26-59. 

6 

 
 
                                                 
(iii) 

in  the  third  scenario,  competitors  use  individual  algorithms  that  facilitate  an 
alignment in their market behavior.  In this case, it is not yet clear how and to what 
extent the parallel use of algorithms can lead to collusive outcomes when there is 
no prior or ongoing contact between firms.  Article 101 does not prohibit conscious 
parallel behavior between undertakings, therefore, in order for this scenario to be 
caught under Article 101, a certain degree of “algorithm communication” must be 
found.    However,  it  currently  seems  to  remain  an  open  question  whether  an 
alignment of two or more pricing algorithms can likely arise that can actually lead 
to  perfect  parallel  behavior  between  companies  or  if  such  algorithm-organized 
parallel  behavior  can  lead  to  supra-competitive  prices.28 On  the  contrary,  it  has 
been shown that the increased market transparency caused by algorithms can favor 
price competition and new entrants.29 

Finally,  if  an  enforcement  gap  actually  existed,  the  creation  of  an  ad  hoc  regulatory 
framework could, on the one hand, help close the gap without changing the applicable rules; 
on the other hand, however, such a framework could also act as a barrier to entry and hinder 
innovation.  Therefore, any additional intervention should be explored only following an in-
depth understanding of the competition concerns caused by algorithms. 

In sum, the open-textured language of the existing competition law rules afforded them 
a ductility that has allowed competition law to address new economic learning and new market 
contexts.    Therefore,  a  cautious  approach  when  taking  any  action  to  meaningfully  redraw 
competition law is warranted and consistent with the principle of proportionality..   

This  is  all  the  more  important  because  traditionally  the  CJEU  has  adopted  a  careful 
approach  as  to  the  scope  and  intensity  of  its  own  review  of  the  Commission’s  decisions  in 
complex economic matters.  In particular, the CJEU has always been most reluctant to replace 
its own assessment of facts for the complex assessments of an economic nature made by the 
Commission, and has never withdrawn from the strict conception of its powers of review on 
appeal.30  However, as more sophisticated economic analysis has been developed to fully grasp 
the impact of the conduct of undertakings on the market, the EU courts have progressively felt 
the need to strengthen their scrutiny in competition cases. The recent judgment in Intel is an 
important step, albeit limited, in this regard.31  

3.   THE NEED FOR APPROPRIATE CHECKS AND BALANCES  

The  proposed  NCT  advocates  wide-ranging  reforms  introducing  potentially  sweeping 

discretionary enforcement powers.  In particular: 

28  

29  

30  

31  

Ibid., p. 52. See also Pierre Honoré and Guillaume Fabre, Algorithmic Pricing under Article 101 TFEU, 
Global Competition Review, 2019. 
See  generally,  OECD,  Algorithms  and  Collusion  -  Background  Note  by 
DAF/COMP(2017)4. 
See  J.  L.  da  Cruz  Vilaça,  The  intensity  of  judicial  review  in  complex  economic  matters—recent 
competition law judgments of the Court of Justice of the EU, Journal of Antitrust Enforcement, Volume 
6, Issue 2, 2018, pp. 173–188. 
Judgment in Case C-413/14 P Intel Corp. v Commission [2017]. 

the  Secretariat, 

7 

 
 
                                                 
- 

- 

the  Commission  would  not  have  to  establish  dominance  and/or  an  abuse  under 
Article 102 TFEU in order to act against unilateral conduct, and it would have the 
power to impose far-reaching structural and behavioral remedies; 

the  Commission  would  have  mostly  unfettered  powers  to  intervene  not  only  in 
“markets displaying systemic failures,” but also to make an “early intervention” on 
a prognostic assessment in markets wherever it considers that there is a “threat [to] 
competition.”32  

In light of the potential implications of the Commission’s NCT proposals, investigated 
parties’ procedural rights and their entitlement to judicial protection under the EU’s legal order, 
pursuant to Article 6 of the European Convention of Human Rights and Articles 47 and 48 of 
the EU Charter of Fundamental Rights, cannot be diluted.  This calls for careful consideration 
of meaningful adequate procedural and substantive safeguards to provide oversight of how this 
broad regulatory discretion is exercised in order to determine whether intervention is warranted 
and how appropriate remedies will be designed, as well as reduce the burden imposed on the 
undertakings involved to ensure their right to good administration, right of defense and their 
right to judicial review.  

On the contrary, the Commission’s NCT consultation documents leave undeveloped any 
details  on  the  procedural  aspects  that the Commission will need to conform to and do not 
contain any clear limiting principles or measures designed to ensure procedural fairness and 
independence  of  the  decision-making  process.    In  fact,  the  Commission’s  NCT  Impact 
Assessment  merely  refers  briefly  to  the  importance  of  “[taking]  into  account  the  rights  of 
defense and the right to judicial review,”33 while the Questionnaire simply asks respondents to 
provide  suggestions  on  whether  the  NCT  “should”  be  subject  to  “adequate  procedural 
safeguards, including judicial review.”34 

There  is  an  inescapable  need  to  identify  measures  that  would  be  appropriate  to 
counterbalance  the  envisioned  new  enforcement  powers.    Robust  procedural  safeguards  are 
essential  to  secure  a  fair  process  and,  ultimately,  better  decision-making.  As  noted  by  the 
President of the General Court Marc van der Woude: “where the contested conduct of the public 
authorities is repressive in nature, it is hard to conceive, at least in free democratic societies, 
that citizens and firms can be condemned on the basis of estimates, approximations or guesses, 
even if they are informed ones. Uncertainty must then be balanced against the requirements of 
the presumption of innocence.”35  

In detail, adequate checks and balances should be targeted at guaranteeing parties’ rights 

to: 

32  
33  
34  
35  

Commission’s NCT Impact Assessment, p. 2. 
Commission’s NCT Impact Assessment, p. 4. 
NCT Questionnaire, Section 39, p. 44. 
Marc van der Woude, Judicial Control in Complex Economic Matters, Journal of European Competition 
Law & Practice, Volume 10, Issue 7, September 2019, pp. 415–423. 

8 

 
 
                                                 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 

(v) 

transparency of the Commission’s decision-making process;  
access the evidence collected by the Commission;  
receive a fair hearing on the evidence of the case;  
appropriate access to the decision-makers and sufficient time to respond to requests 
for information and other intermediate steps throughout the investigation, such as 
interim reports and statements of objections; and 
judicial review, which is particularly important to ensure protection of rights where 
remedies are imposed, but also whether the Commission would be required to issue 
an appealable decision following complaints and/or at other preliminary stages. 

By clearly delimiting the scope of the Commission’s powers and the regime of effective 
judicial protection for parties subject to those procedures, such safeguards will strengthen the 
legitimacy of the Commission’s actions under any new regime.  

4.  THE  NEED  FOR  CLEAR  LEGAL  AND  EVIDENTIARY  STANDARDS  FOR  THE 

IMPOSITION OF REMEDIES AND FOR ROBUST EFFECTS-BASED ANALYSIS 

The  NCT  seems  to  envision  a  lowering  of  the  legal  and  evidentiary  standard  for 
intervention  so  as  to  allow  the  Commission  to  intervene  and  impose  remedies  vis-à-vis 
unilateral  conduct  “without  any  prior  finding  of  an  infringement  pursuant  to  Article  102 
TFEU,”36 by undertakings that are not dominant on a relevant market.37  

We understand that, to some extent, the justification for easing the legal and evidentiary 
burden  appears  to  rest  on  a  supposed  ability  to  foresee  developments  in  ever-moving  and 
dynamic markets, and in which outcomes are fundamentally unpredictable.  However, there 
is  a  real  risk  that  the  Commission’s  proposals,  if  enacted,  would  result  in  a  significant 
deviation  from  the  legal  and  evidentiary  standards  for  intervention  as  established  by 
fundamental  European  Union  law  and  the  CJEU  case  law,  which  foster  an  evidence-led 
approach that is subject to clear standards and judicial review.  

On  this  point,  we  believe  further  analysis  is  needed  on  the  appropriateness  and 
desirability of allowing the Commission to impose remedies on companies. An alternative 
may  be  to  limit  the  Commission  powers  to  making  non-binding  recommendations  to 
companies, as well as to inform and make recommendations and proposals to sectorial 
regulators, and to make legislative recommendations.  Such an alternative could avoid or 
reduce the risk of a disproportionate interference with the free market economy that could 
have a detrimental effect on the EU economy and consumers, as it could potentially stifle 
innovation, growth and investment. 

This risk is heightened by the vagueness of the NCT’s proposal. For instance, the NCT 
Questionnaire  makes  reference  to  an  imprecisely-defined  concept  of  “tipping  markets”  – 
which constitutes one of the NCT’s key focus areas – and to cases where “a (not necessarily 
dominant) company [is] relying on large amounts of data” “to extend its market position to 

36  
37  

See NCT’s Options 1 and 2, Commission’s NCT Impact Assessment, p. 3. 
See NCT’s Options 3 and 4, Id. 

9 

 
 
                                                 
related  markets”. 38    However,  the  available  consultation  documents  do  not  contain  a 
prescriptive list of scenarios for intervention.  Therefore, the notion that certain markets are 
prone to ‘tipping,’ whereby the ‘winner takes most,’ appears to be a particularly speculative 
ground  for  the  introduction  of  a  new  far-reaching  and  highly  invasive  enforcement  tool, 
especially because there is scarcely any enforcement practice relating to ‘tipping,’ let alone 
case law from the CJEU.  Conversely, the NCT seems to conflate ‘tipping’ with successful 
organic growth as a result of competition on the merits and innovation.39  

In light of this, imposing remedies to avoid markets tipping would seem unjustified and 
premature, ultimately resulting in a reversal of the burden of proof that would fundamentally 
change EU standards of due process and create legal uncertainty.  This in turn would reduce 
companies’ incentives to compete, invest and innovate.  However, if, despite the described 
shortcomings,  the  Commission  decides  to  move  forward  with  this  new  tool,  it  should  be 
accompanied by appropriate safeguards, rights of defense and due process, as set out above40 
and  by  a  robust  effects-based  analysis  ensuring  that  any  remedies  imposed  are  absolutely 
necessary, proportionate, properly designed and capable of addressing any perceived issues. 

Indeed,  despite  the  fact  that  “the  Commission  would  not  make  any  finding  of  an 
infringement  of  the  EU  competition  rules,  nor  impose  fines  and  thus  not  generate  rights  to 
launch damage claims”41 the Commission’s intervention through the NCT could have a vast 
economic impact on the concerned undertaking.  Indeed, the imposition of behavioral and/or 
structural remedies can have a much greater impact than a pecuniary fine, resulting in radical 
changes to undertakings’ business models and/or the restructuring of entire industries.  

Moreover, the Commission’s NCT Impact Assessment states that “the proportionality of 
the  costs  incurred  would  be  ensured  by  the  fact  that  such  remedies  have  to  be  limited  to 
ensuring the proper functioning of the market under scrutiny. Consumer benefits deriving from 
the timely intervention under all policy options should outweigh those costs.”42  This calls for 
a vigorous effects-based economic assessment in order to achieve a trade-off by weighing the 
evidence  of  the  extent  and  nature  of  any  perceived  anticompetitive  effects  caused  by  the 
“structural risks for competition” and/or “structural lack of competition,” against the impact 
on various types of consumer benefits from a particular course of conduct, and then assessing 
the costs/benefits of  any intervention.   A detailed analysis of this nature would sharpen the 
identification  of  potential  areas  of  concern  and  ultimately  improve  the  legitimacy  of  any 
enforcement intervention, also in light of the heightened standards prescribed by the CJEU on 

38  
39  

40  
41  
42  

NCT Questionnaire, Section 8.1, p. 19. 
Conversely, as explained in our response to the NCT Questionnaire (see answers to Question 17.1), we 
encourage  the  Commission  to  focus  on  markets  that  have  already  tipped,  ensuring  that  dominant 
companies  in  those  markets  are  not  abusing  their  position  to  impose  unfair  conditions  or  extract 
monopoly rents, as well as talking into account on a case-by-case basis the efficiency gains resulting 
from network effects.  
See Section 3. 
Commission’s NCT Impact Assessment, 4 June 2020, Section B. 
Ibid., Section C. 

10 

 
 
                                                 
the robustness of the Commission’s effects analysis in the Intel43 and the recent Hutchison44 
judgments.   

5.  PROLIFERATION OF OVERLAPPING ENFORCEMENT TOOLS  

In a press release on the proposed NCT, the Commission announced that the proposal 
would  be  “without  prejudice  to  existing  sector-specific  regulation”  and  the  “existing 
competition tools currently available to […] the national competition authorities of the EU 
Member States” while being “complementary to the […] initiative on platform-specific ex ante 
regulation.”45  Despite this wishful statement, the NCT seems to overlap with and, to a certain 
extent even duplicate existing and expected enforcement tools at the EU and Member State 
level. In particular the following three overlaying areas can be detected. 

A.  Overlapping with the proposed Commission ex ante regulatory tool 

On 2 June 2020, in parallel to the launch of the NCT public consultation, the Commission 
launched a public consultation regarding a proposed “ex ante  regulatory instrument of very 
large online platforms acting as gatekeepers” (the “Ex Ante Gatekeeper Regulation”) which 
forms part of the DSA package.46 

In spite of the fact that the Commission’s NCT Impact Assessment clarifies that the NCT 
is “complementary to the Commission’s new initiative on platform-specific ex ante regulation, 
which  seeks  to  provide  a  fair  trading  environment  for  the  platform  ecosystems,” 47 the  two 
initiatives  appear  to  substantially  overlap.    In  detail,  the  proposed  Ex  Ante  Gatekeeper 
Regulation  would  specifically  target  “large  online  platforms”  supposed  to  be  “acting  as 
gatekeepers”  benefiting  from  “significant  network  effects.”48 The  NCT,  by  the  same  token, 
ascertains market positions of “entrenched dominance,” “gatekeeper position[s]” and “network 
and scale effects” among the structural anticompetitive issues to be tackled by the NCT.49  

The parallel proposals as a result generate a risk of fragmentation and absence of clarity 
as  to  competence,  legal  certainty,  inconsistent  enforcement  and  a  duplicative  compliance 
burden for the businesses concerned.  Consequently, the Commission would need to carefully 
manage the two tools – if adopted and in whatever form ultimately adopted – by defining the 
scope of each prior to their adoption (if any) and regulating which tool will take precedence in 
scenarios in which they could hypothetically apply in parallel. 

43  
44  
45  

46  

47  
48  
49  

Judgment in Case C-413/14 P Intel Corp. v Commission [2017]. 
Judgment in Case T-399/16 CK Telecoms UK investments Ltd v Commission [2020]. 
European Commission press release, Brussels, 2 June 2020; Commission’s NCT Impact Assessment, p. 
2. 
Commission, Proposal for a Regulation: Digital Services Act package – ex ante regulatory instrument 
June  2020,  available  at: 
of  very 
https://ec.europa.eu/info/law/better- 
regulation/have-your-say/initiatives/12418-Digital-Services-Act-
package-ex-ante-regulatory-instrument-of-very-large-online-platforms-acting-as-gatekeepers 
Commission’s NCT Impact Assessment, p. 2. 
Ex Ante Gatekeeper Regulation, p. 1. 
Commission’s NCT Impact Assessment, pp. 2-5. 

large  online  platforms  acting  as  gatekeepers,  2 

11 

 
 
                                                 
B.  Overlapping with expected national legislative initiatives 

The Commission’s NCT Impact Assessment recognizes that “several EU Member States 
have called for changes […] to the existing competition rules” and that some “have prepared 
legislative proposals for amendments”50 to their national laws.  Nonetheless, the NCT does not 
provide any practical guidance on how the division of competence between the Commission 
and Member States will operate in practice.  Appropriate consideration should be given to this 
aspect as several domestic initiatives feature a regulatory nature or aim at addressing unilateral 
conduct beyond the scope of Article 102 TFEU and, as a consequence, would fall outside the 
allocation of competence set forth in Regulation 1/2003.51   

Moreover, according to the concept of subsidiarity,52 the Commission’s initiative should 
recognize and address the central role of national competition authorities and sector-specific 
national regulatory  agencies  as effective enforcers, since for some levels of the  market, the 
national authorities are better placed to deal with the enforcement of EU rules while respecting 
national specificities.  In this respect, cooperation between the Commission and the national 
competition authorities in all EU Member States through the European Competition Network 
(“ECN”)  is  central  in  order  to  create  an  effective  mechanism  to  counter  companies  which 
engage in cross-border practices restricting competition.   

C.  Overlapping with other initiatives and policies 

To guarantee a coherent approach across all sectors, the Commission should also give 
proper  consideration,  not  just  to  the  existing  legislative  framework,  but  to  the  process  of 
revising competition law provisions, in particular adapting them to a digital environment (the 
Horizontal and Vertical Block Exemptions Regulations and Guidelines, as well as the review 
of the Market Definition Notice and the Merger Control Regulation), the ongoing review of 
the E-Commerce Directive as part of the DSA, the Commission’s data strategy53 or additional 
regulation  being  considered  concerning  Artificial  Intelligence54 as  well  as  assessing,  in  due 
time,  the  effects  of  the  EU  Regulation  on  platform-to-business  relations  (the  so-called  P2B 
regulation).55  

In  sum,  the  multiplying  of  somewhat  duplicative  enforcement  tools  involves  a 
considerable burden to business and intensifies the risk of inconsistent outcomes.  Given that 

50  
51  

52  
53  

54  

55  

Ibid., p. 2. 
Council  Regulation  (EC)  No  1/2003  of  16  December  2002  on  the  implementation  of  the  rules  on 
competition laid down in Articles 81 and 82 of the Treaty. 
See Article 5 TEU.  
Communication from the Commission to the European Parliament, the European Council, the Council, 
the European Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions, A European strategy 
for data, Brussels, 19.2.2020, COM(2020) 66 final. 
Communication from the Commission to the European Parliament, the European Council, the Council, 
the European Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions, Artificial Intelligence 
for Europe, Brussels, 25.4.2018 COM(2018) 237 final. 
Regulation (EU) 2019/1150 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 20 June 2019 on promoting 
fairness and transparency for business users of online intermediation services, PE/56/2019/REV/1, OJ L 
186, 11.7.2019, p. 57–79.  

12 

 
 
                                                 
many market participants now have pan-EU business models, the NCT should aim at attaining 
a degree of harmonization of the various Member State initiatives, thus effectively stimulating 
a well-functioning Single Market. 

6.  CONCLUSIONS  

AIGE supports the Commission’s efforts to ensure competition in the Single Market can 
properly work to the benefit of consumers.  In this respect, we favor a framework providing 
the Commission and national competition authorities with robust enforcement powers, while 
fostering coordination between the ex ante and ex post enforcement regimes as they operate 
and interact within a unique institutional dynamic in the EU.   

In  our  view,  potential  competition  concerns  are  sufficiently  addressed  via  existing 
competition rules.  Given the current debate on the sufficiency of existing enforcement tools 
and the absence of clear consensus that there is any real ‘gap’ in that regard, a cautious attitude 
in taking any actions to reform competition law is warranted.  The recent track record of the 
Commission  before  the  CJEU  suggests  that  the  Commission  has  an  adequate  room  for 
intervention against properly defined dominant market players, including in markets that are 
‘tipping’, or to impose restorative and positive remedies once it has thoroughly weighed the 
effects of the conduct in question.  

We  would,  therefore,  encourage  the  Commission  to  leverage  the  existing  tools  and 
maximize them, rather than try to coordinate them with new ones.  In this context, our concrete 
proposals are the following:  

(i) 

(ii) 

(iii) 

(iv) 

updating  the  existing  guidance  on  abusive  exclusionary  conduct  by  dominant 
players to adapt to the digital environment;  
addressing some of the issues with establishing dominance and market power, by 
further tightening the definition of markets and developing a methodology to assess 
zero-price markets; and 
relying on existing interim measures to guarantee that infringements of Article 101 
and/or Article 102 TFEU are suspended or reversed while the Commission comes 
to a final decision; 
ensuring that any new competition law enforcement tool will be aligned with the 
fundamental principles of EU law, especially proportionality of the intervention, 
due  process,  procedural  check  and  balances,  legal  certainty,  subsidiarity  and 
coordination  between  the  Commission  and  national  competition  authorities,  as 
explained above.    

AIGE therefore welcomes further discussion and reflection on the fitness of the Commission’s 
enforcement powers, once the draft text of the NCT will be advanced.   

*** 

13 

 
 
