8 Sept, 2020 

Digital Services Act and New Competition Tool  

Lie Detectors response to public consultations 

Lie  Detectors,  an  award-winning  journalist-led  media  literacy  campaign  in  Europe,  welcomes  the 
ability to respond to the Commission consultation on the Digital Services Act and the New Competition 
Tool.  

In relation to the Digital Services Act consultation, Lie Detectors supports the introduction of Ex Ante 
Regulation for large online platforms with significant network effects acting as gatekeepers, and of a 
New Competition Tool.  

The  instinct  of  regulators  and  policymakers  to  hold  large  platforms  like  Facebook  and  Google  to 
account for their role in the proliferation of online disinformation and in the undermining of quality 
journalism is right. With the necessary political will, solutions exist that will help rein in the epidemic 
of  disinformation  that  is  sweeping  away  trust  in  established  facts,  in  scientific  method  and  in 
democratic institutions designed to protect us. 

The  basis  of  such  solutions  lies  in  taking  on  disinformation  at  its  source,  that  is,  by  taking  on  the 
business model of large platforms such as Facebook and Google which stoke outrage for revenue and 
engage  in  the  “monetising  of  lies”  as  the  European  Commission  itself  has  called  it.  Following  the 
money  and  applying  existing  and  new  antitrust  principles  is  a  fundamental  avenue  for  securing 
European democracy. 

Other approaches have proven incapable of denting the outrage economy and its corrosive effects on 
democracy.  Fact-checking  initiatives  has  long  been  the  darling  of  conflict-shy  regulators  and 
policymakers looking for quick and high-profile fixes. While laudable and valuable to an extent, these 
initiatives have proven to touch only the tip of the iceberg. Disinformation has continued to adapt, 
proliferate and confound the most experienced fact-checkers, evading detection in encrypted spaces 
and image- and video-based platforms owned by the largest and most powerful platforms. With little 
realistic recourse to alternatives, users remain trapped in a cycle of providing data for the platforms’ 
algorithms,  which  exacerbate  the  reach  and  effect  of  disinformation.  Foreign  powers  continue  to 
subvert democratic processes via manipulative campaigns on the largest platforms. 

At the same time, the power of the platforms is has grown exponentially, not only via their dominant 
position but also through widely-reported influence-buying campaigns that have gone a significant 
way to co-opting  the very information sectors they undermine: journalism and media organisations 
increasingly  dependent  on  fact-checking  contracts  from  the  platforms;  academia  increasingly 
dependent  on  data-analysis  contracts  from  the  platforms,  and  even  policymakers  who  see  no 
alternative but depending on the platforms for rooting out illegal and borderline illegal content one 
post at a time.   

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The platforms’ non-adherence to the EU Code of Practice on Disinformation, condemned repeatedly 
by the European Commission, highlights that self-regulation will fail when a business model built on 
trapping users and stoking outrage is at stake. 

The  ongoing  pandemic  has  thrown  this  into  sharp  relief.  Young  people  report  being  increasingly 
concerned about conspiracy theories circulating in their social media groups and have trouble finding 
reliable information online at a time when that information saves lives. 

The European Commission is uniquely placed to withstand the pressures of the platforms and should 
use competition tools to investigate links between the advertising business model of the platform and 
the dissemination of disinformation.  

Gatekeeper  designation  and  a  review  of  the  liability  regime  of  digital  services  acting  as  publishers 
should  aim  among  other  things  to  re-establishing  some  viability  of  journalism  as  a  fundamental 
democratic  service  to  EU  citizens.  The  challenge  posed  by  large  platforms  requires  new  tools  in 
addition  to  traditional  competition  law  enforcement  in  order  to  protect  consumers’  interests  and 
democracy itself. 

-0- 

Lie  Detectors  is  an  award-winning  journalist-led  media-literacy  campaign  in  Europe.  The  non-profit 
organisation works with more than 200 professional journalists to secure democracy by empowering 
tens of thousands of young people and their teachers to tackle online disinformation and by fostering 
understanding of quality journalism. Our advocacy arises from the findings of our work with children 
and teachers across Europe and focuses on tackling disinformation from the demand perspective and 
the supply perspective. We have advised the European Commission as a member of the High-Level 
Expert Group on Fake News and Online Disinformation and the Media Literacy Expert Group.  

When  addressing  the  demand-side  of  disinformation,  we  support  the  integration  of  critical  media 
literacy  into  school  rankings  gauges,  school  curricula  and  teacher-training  curricula,  and  the 
independence of journalism and education from corporate interest. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
