ICC replies to questionnaire for EC consultation on the need for a new 
competition tool 

Questions 6 to 42 

8 September 2020 

6. Please indicate to what extent each of the following market features/elements can be a 
source or part of the reasons for a structural competition problem in a given market in your 
view. Please, give examples of sectors/markets or scenarios you are aware of in the follow-up 
question. 

1 

 
  
 
 
 
 
2 

 
  
 
 
6.1. Can you think of any other market features/elements that could be a source or part of the 
reasons for a structural 6.1. Can you think of any other market features/elements that could be 
a source or part of the reasons for a structural competition problem in a given market? 

Yes 

No 

3 

 
  
 
 
 
 
7. Please indicate what market scenarios may in your view qualify as structural competition 
problems and rate them according to their importance.

7.1. Please explain your answers above and give examples if possible. 

After a careful and attentive analysis of the text that precedes point C of the Questionnaire, regarding 
“structural  competition  problems”,  we  must  point  that  “the  questions  in  this  section  aim  to  gather 
information on the types of market characteristics that may result in structural competition problems, 
and on gaps  in Articles 101 and 102  of  the EU Treaty, in order to  understand the  most appropriate 
scope for a new competition tool”. Therefore, the answers provided by ICC, as well as this explanation, 
a  priori,  are  entirely  based  in  the  predisposition  that  there  is  not  a  need  for  a  new  competition  tool. 
Briefly  explaining  the  ICC  position  which  is  of  the  most  importance  to  understanding  the  responses 
given, we consider that due to the existing regulatory framework based on Articles 101 and 102 TFEU 
and  its  application  through  Regulation  1/2003,  the  existing  “toolbox”  has  demonstrated  itself  to  be 
flexible and malleable enough to adapt to a digitalized driven economy, thus, as revealed by several 
court-cases the existing competition regulatory framework is sufficient and adequate. 

Proceeding to explain the answers presented: 

1. This situation does not constitute an inherent competition problem and may be, in fact, an essential 
part of the competitive process. If an enterprise has transferable assets, skills and know-how’s, utilising 
those for entering a new area of activity is indeed a contribution for better outcomes regarding the users. 
This  can  be  considered  a  normal  activity  concerning  cost  reduction  and  a  way  to  increase  the 

4 

 
  
 
 
possibilities to successfully enter a new market. This situation could only be problematic, justifying an 
intervention  and  perhaps  the  imposition  of  a  remedy  or  a  commitment  by  the  Commission  after  a 
detailed  assessment  concludes  that  this  practices  were  of  an  anti-competitive  leveraging  nature, 
situations that already fall into the existing regulatory framework (if an undertaking is dominant). Only 
in these cases an intervention can be considered proportionate and fair. Additionally, we must consider 
the dubious essence and criteria utilised to describe a “not necessarily dominant company” with such 
extended market power. Case AT. 39740 Google Search (Shopping). 

2. Unilateral anti-competitive behaviours by a dominant company already fall within the scope of Article 
102 TFEU. There is a need for redoubled attention in distinguished practices that are innovative, and 
attribute determined positions to companies due to its own merit and those that “put competitors at a 
disadvantage in the market unfairly” (emphasis added). Having that said, Article 17 of Regulation 1/2003 
permits  sector  inquires  that  allow  thorough  processes  that  ultimately  permit  to  distinguish  those 
practices and, in case of finding an infringement, the normal procedures adopted. 

3.  and  4.  The  two  situations  appointed  appear  based  on  what  is  called  the  algorithmic  control  in 
oligopolistic markets. This theory posits that the increased availability of information that results from 
digitalisation enhances the risk of price hegemony based on tacit collusions, particularly in oligopolistic 
markets.  Nonetheless,  we  must  acknowledge  there  is  an  important  distinction  between  a  highly 
informed market where price differences between competitors are very small because competition has 
made such marginal differences significant and a market involving tacit agreements among competitors 
to restrict competition.  Both situations can yield a market where competitors’ prices tend to cluster at 
particular  points,  but  one  situation  is  highly  competitive  and  the  market  highly  responsive  to  new 
information, while the other is resistant to new information and static. This problem yields readily to the 
traditional tools for competition analysis. First, there is a need to identify if this behaviors fall within the 
prohibition of cartels (which is already regulated) or if it consists in parallel behaviours resulting from 
collaboration of algorithms not involving market behaviour that would restrict competition and, therefore, 
not being considered prohibited. In any case, it is yet to be demonstrated that the existing regulation 
that enforces competition law is inadequate, inclusively sector inquires can provide a lot of experience 
and the needed expertise to develop a legally reliable use of algorithms,  instead of considering other 
stricter measures that could have a prejudicial impact on innovation. 

5. Please see reply to question 42, below. 

6. Once again, “tipping markets” are not necessarily problematic. In fact, we have to consider that the 
idiosyncrasy of “tipping” is related to the increased value that users acquire from network effects. In 
markets  with  such  characteristics  preventing  “tipping”  would  be  nothing  but  a  pure  restriction  of 
performance competition, preventing the internal growth of businesses, ultimately, determining worse 
results for consumers. Also, this practice is very difficult to be distinguished from successful integral 
growth  as  the  outcome  of  a  company’s  competition  achievements  on  its  own  merits.  Therefore,  an 
intervention  regarding  “tipping  markets”  is  realistically  not  needed,  only  being  justified  when  an 
undertaking has critical market power and abuses it (deliberately and perversely driving competitors out 
of  a  certain  market),  but  for  these  types  of  situations  already  fall  under  the  existing  competition 
legislation. 

5 

 
  
 
 
8. Structural competition problems may arise in markets where a (not necessarily dominant) 
company with market power in a core market may apply repeated strategies to extend its 
market position to related markets, for instance, by relying on large amounts of data. 

* 8.1. Do you have knowledge or did you come across such market situation? 

Yes 

No 

Not applicable /no relevant experience or knowledge 

* 9. Do you think that there is a need for the Commission to be able to intervene in situations 
where structural competition problems may arise due to repeated strategies by companies 
with market power to extend their market position into related markets? 

Yes 

No 

Not applicable /no relevant experience or knowledge 

* 9.2. Do you consider that Articles 101 and 102 of the EU Treaty are suitable and sufficiently 
effective to address those market situations? 

Yes 

No 

Not applicable /no relevant experience or knowledge 

10. Anti-competitive monopolisation refers to scenarios where one market player may rapidly 
acquire market shares due to its capacity to put competitors at a disadvantage in the market 
unfairly, for instance, by imposing unfair business practices or by limiting access to key 
inputs, such as data. 

* 10.1. Do you have knowledge or did you come across such market situation? 

Yes 

No 

Not applicable /no relevant experience or knowledge 

* 11. Do you think that there is a need for the Commission to be able to intervene in situations 
where structural competition problems may arise due to anti-competitive monopolisation? 

6 

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Yes 

No 

Not applicable /no relevant experience or knowledge 

* 11.2. Do you consider that Articles 101 and 102 of the EU Treaty are suitable and sufficiently 
effective to address anti-competitive monopolisation? 

Yes 

No 

Not applicable /no relevant experience or knowledge 

12. An oligopoly is a highly concentrated market structure, where a few sizeable firms operate. 
Oligopolists may be able to behave in a parallel manner and derive benefits from their 
collective market power without necessarily entering into an agreement or concerted practice 
of the kind generally prohibited by competition law. In those situations rivals often ‘move 
together’ to e.g. raise prices or limit production at the same time and to the same extent, 
without having an explicit agreement. Such so-called coordinated behaviour can have the 
same outcome as a cartel for customers, e.g. price increases are aligned. 

* 12.1. Do you have knowledge or did you come across such market situations? 

Yes 

No 

Not applicable /no relevant experience or knowledge 

* 12.4. Can you think of any other features of an oligopolistic market with a high/substantial 
risk of tacit collusion? 

Yes 

No 

* 13. Do you consider that there is a need for the Commission to be able to intervene in 
oligopolistic markets prone to tacit collusion in order to preserve/improve competition? 

Yes 

No 

7 

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Not applicable /no relevant experience or knowledge 

* 13.2. Do you consider that Articles 101 and 102 of the EU Treaty are suitable and sufficiently 
effective instruments to address oligopolistic market situations prone to tacit collusion? 

Yes 

No 

Not applicable /no relevant experience or knowledge 

14. Relying on digital tools, companies may easily align their behaviour, in particular retail 
prices via pricing algorithms. (Pricing algorithms are automated tools that allow very frequent 
changes to prices and other terms taking into account all or most competing offers on the 
market.) 

* 14.1. Do you have knowledge or did you come across such market situations? 

Yes 

No 

Not applicable /no relevant experience or knowledge. 

* 15. Do you consider that there is a need for the Commission to be able to intervene in 
markets where pricing algorithms are prevalent in order to preserve/improve competition? 

Yes 

No 

Not applicable /no relevant experience or knowledge 

* 15.2. Do you consider that Articles 101 and 102 of the EU Treaty are suitable and sufficiently 
effective instruments to address all scenarios where algorithmic pricing can raise competition 
issues? 

Yes 

No 

Not applicable /no relevant experience or knowledge 

16. So-called tipping (or ‘winner takes most’) markets are markets where the number of users 
is a key element for business success: if a firm reaches a critical threshold of customers, it 
gets a disproportionate advantage in capturing remaining customers. Therefore, due to certain 

8 

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
characteristics of that market, only one or very few companies will remain on those markets in 
the long term. 

* 16.1. Do you have knowledge or did you come across such market situations? 

Yes 

No 

Not applicable /no relevant experience or knowledge 

* 17. Do you consider that there is a need for the Commission to be able to intervene early in 
tipping markets to preserve/improve competition? 

Yes 

No 

Not applicable /no relevant experience or knowledge. 

* 17.2. Do you consider that Articles 101/102 of the EU Treaty are suitable and sufficiently 
effective instruments to intervene early in ‘tipping markets’, to preserve/improve competition? 

Yes 

No 

Not applicable /no relevant experience or knowledge 

18. So-called ‘gatekeepers’ control access to a number of customers (and/or to a given 
input/service such as data) that – at least in the medium term – cannot be reached otherwise. 
Typically, customers of gatekeepers cannot switch easily (‘single-homing’). A gatekeeper may 
not necessarily be ‘dominant’ within the meaning of Article 102 of the EU Treaty. 

* 18.1. Have you encountered or are you aware of markets characterised by ‘gatekeepers’? 

Yes 

No 

Not applicable / no relevant experience or knowledge 

* 19. Do you consider that there is a need for the Commission to be able to intervene in 
gatekeeper scenarios to prevent/address structural competition problems? 

9 

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Yes 

No 

Not applicable /no relevant experience or knowledge 

* 19.2. Do you consider that Articles 101 and 102 of the EU Treaty are suitable and sufficiently 
effective instruments to intervene in markets characterised by ‘gatekeeper platforms’ in order 
to preserve/improve competition? 

Yes 

No 

Not applicable /no relevant experience or knowledge 

* 20. In which sectors/markets do you consider that structural competition problems may 
occur? 

Structural competition problems may occur in all sectors/markets 

Structural competition problems may occur in some specific sectors/markets (including but not 
only digital sectors/markets). 

Structural competition problems only occur in digital sectors/markets 

Structural competition problems mainly occur in digital sectors/markets 

Not applicable / no relevant experience or knowledge 

* 21. If in response to question 7 you indicated that other forms of structural competition 
problems in addition to the ones listed above exist, do you consider that there is a need for the 
Commission to be able to intervene in order to address these other forms of structural 
competition problems in order to preserve/improve competition? 

Yes 

No 

Not applicable /no relevant experience or knowledge 

* 22. Article 101 of the EU Treaty prohibits agreements between companies which prevent, 
restrict or distort competition in the EU and which may affect trade between Member States 
(anti-competitive agreements). These include, for example, price-fixing or market-sharing 
cartels. Is Article 101 of the EU Treaty, in your view, a suitable and sufficiently effective 
instrument to address structural competition problems? 

10 

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Yes 

No 

Not applicable/no relevant experience or knowledge 

* 23. Article 102 of the Treaty prohibits any abuse by one or more undertakings of a dominant 
position within the internal market or in a substantial part of it. Is Article 102 of the Treaty, in 
your view, suitable and sufficiently effective to address structural competition problems? 

Yes 

No 

Not applicable/no relevant experience or knowledge 

  D. Assessment of policy options 

The questions in this section seek to gather feedback on the policy options outlined in the Inception 
Impact Assessment. 

* 24. In light of your responses to the questions of Section C, do you think that there is a need 
for a new competition tool to deal with structural competition problems that Articles 101 and 
102 of the EU Treaty (on which current competition law enforcement is based) cannot tackle 
conceptually or cannot address in the most effective manner? (Article 101 of the EU Treaty 
prohibits agreements between companies which prevent, restrict or distort competition in the 
EU and which may affect trade between Member States (anti-competitive agreements). These 
include, for example, price-fixing or market-sharing cartels. Article 102 of the Treaty prohibits 
any abuse by one or more undertakings of a dominant position within the internal market or in 
a substantial part of it.) 

Yes 

No 

Not applicable /no relevant experience or knowledge 

* 25. Do you think that such a new competition tool (that would not establish an infringement 
by a company and would not result in fines) should also be able to prevent structural 
competition problems from arising and thus allow for early intervention in the markets 
concerned? 

Yes 

No 

11 

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Not applicable /no relevant experience or knowledge 

* 26. What are in your view the most important structural competition problems that should be 
tackled with such a new competition tool? 

3000 character(s) maximum 

The  current  regime  --  including  the  tools  presently  available  to  the  Commission  for  competitive 
oversight, analysis, and enforcement – is as well-equipped to handle digital age competition issues as 
it  has  been  for  decades  of  handling  industrial  age  competition  issues.    Because  the  fundamental 
elements of competition remain the same, a NCT, in the molds that it is designed and predicted by the 
“Inception  Impact  Assessment”  is  not  necessary.  Consequently,  even  though  we  commend  the 
Commission for raising such important and currently pertinent questions regarding the modernisation 
and  digitalisation  of  markets  and  the  economy  and  its  adaptability  to  competition  law  and  its  new 
problems, we find that there are no “important structural competition problems that should be tackled 
with such a new competition tool” (emphasis added).  

The existing regulatory framework comprises Articles 101 and 102 TFEU and their application through 
Regulation 1/2003, predominantly by the use of Articles 7, 8, 9 and 17, as well as rules mandated by 
recent  EU  legislation,  including  Regulation  2019/1150  and  the  ongoing  review  of  the  E-Commerce 
Directive.  Several  recent  cases  demonstrate  that  these  tools  can  readily  address  digital-oriented 
structural competition problems: Case AT. 39740 Google Search that confronted fair new theories of 
harm  - 
leveraging  strategies;  Case  AT.  40099  –  Google  Android  and  Case  M.8124 
Microsoft/LinkedIn  (tying);  Case  AT.  40411  –  Google  AdSense  (exclusivity  requirements);  even 
cases  of  economic  dependency/relative  market  power  (General  Motors  Continental  NV  v 
Commission, C-26/75). 

In parallel the Commission may ponder, if so deemed required, the review and update of various of its 
Guidelines  and  Notices  (e.g.  the  current  consultation  into  the  Market  Definition  Notice,  and  similarly 
support updates to the Horizontal and Vertical Guidelines and 102 Enforcement Priorities Guidelines) 
to ensure they are fit for purpose and reflect the new challenges brought about by modernisation and 
digitalisation of the economy. 

As shown in question 7.1 of the questionnaire, ICC is concerned that the Commission’s approach to 
identifying  problematic structural competition scenarios indiscriminately wheat  as well as tares. That 
overbreadth  particularly  when  applied  in  an  early  intervention  scenario  where  there  is  no  finding  of 
misconduct would do  harm to  innovation, competition and,  inevitably to the consumers. It  is entirely 
foreseeable that any tool that can produce such undesired outcomes  may be applied selectively and 
inconsistently.  The Commission can better attain its enforcement objectives by applying the familiar 
analytic  tools  of  existing  competition  law  –  fact-based  definition  of  product  and  geographic  markets, 
abuse  of  dominance,  and  cartel  actions  --  more  consistently  and  more  searchingly.  Proportionate 
intervention should occur only after a methodical and thorough finding of misconduct, and for that, there 
already is a functioning “toolbox”. For that reason, to the extent that the new tool would restrict market 
participants in ways current competition  laws  and regulations do not,  it presents a significant risk of 
making  markets  less  competitive,  rather  than  more.  And  to  the  extent  that  it  reaches  different 
conclusions  via  different  analytic  approaches,  it  increases  complexity,  creates  opportunities  for 
enterprises to game one system against another, and decreases the predictability of enforcement on 
which both consumers and competitors alike depend. 

12 

 
  
 
 
This is not saying that the existing regulatory toolbox is “bulletproof” and does not  need to be updated. 
For  instance,  distinguishing  between  collusion  and  competition  in  oligopolistic  markets  where 
information  enables  algorithmic  pricing  decisions  may  be  an  area  where  that  key  distinction  can  be 
facilitated by development of analytic techniques that make use of the very information that gives rise 
to    the  situation.  In  contrast,  it  is  saying  that  there  is  not  a  need  for  such  a  deep  legislative  reform, 
especially the one entailed by the IIA, due to the uncertainties and incoherencies it would impose, but 
preferably a better use of the full panoply of instruments that the Commission already has at its disposal. 

* 27. In your view, what should be the basis for intervention for the new competition tool? 

The tool should be dominance-based (i.e. it shall only be applicable to dominant companies 
within the meaning of Article 102 of the EU Treaty) 

The tool should focus on structural competition problems and thus be potentially applicable to 
all undertakings in a market (i.e. including dominant but also non-dominant companies). 

Other 

Not applicable /no relevant experience or knowledge 

* 28. In your view, what shall be the scope of the new competition tool? 

It shall be applicable to all markets (i.e. it should be horizontal in nature) 

It shall be limited in scope to sectors/markets where structural competition problems are the 
most prevalent and/or most likely to arise 

Other 

Not applicable / no relevant experience or knowledge 

* 28.2. Do you consider that the new competition tool should apply only to markets/sectors 
affected by digitisation? 

Yes 

No 

Not applicable / no relevant experience or knowledge 

* 29. If a new competition tool were to be introduced, how should a smooth interaction with 
existing sector specific legislation (e.g. telecom services, financial services) be ensured? 

3000 character(s) maximum 

Presently, the EC is empowered to apply competition rules to all economic sectors, including financial 
service sectors (banking and insurance) and telecoms. Competition law is intertwined with an 
increased tendency for parallel sectoral regulation, being that the conduct that breaches antitrust law 

13 

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
may also breach sectoral regulatory laws. This trend is proving to be very efficient at dealing with 
modern problems, all due to the flexibility of the existing competition framework.  

Equally, in the telecoms sector competition rules are also applicable and are a contributor to increased 
competition in a market traditionally identified for its tendency to form monopolies based on past state 
sponsored  incumbents.    Hence,  competition  legislation  is  conjugated  with  telecoms  own  regulatory 
framework and as stated by the Commission, “one of the main features of the Telecoms Regulatory 
Framework  is  the  set-up  of  ex  ante  access  regulation,  which  consists  of  a  procedure  to  identify 
competitive  bottlenecks  in  telecoms  and  to  impose  remedies  to  address  such  bottlenecks,  following 
competition  law  principles  and  methodologies”,  through    a  concise  implemented  processes  closely 
followed  by  both  the  NRAs  and  the  Commission.  It  is  also  very  important  to  stress  the  ongoing  EU 
legislative initiatives towards the DSM involving a review of telecoms regulatory framework that aims at 
creating  a  “reliable,  trustworthy,  high-speed,  affordable  networks  and  services  that  safeguard 
consumers'  fundamental  rights  to  privacy  and  personal  data  protection  while  also  encouraging 
innovation.” This also requires a precise, certain and consolidated competition framework. 

Having that said, consistently with the position we have been defending, we must conclude that in the 
one hand the current competition legislation is proving to be very efficient, especially when coupled with 
adjacent regulations in addressing novel “digitalised” problems in these specific sectors. On the other 
hand, as it was already shown, the NCT proposed by the Commission would be accompanied by a lot 
of uncertainty and discretionary powers that would put a stall on all the progress that is foreseeable to 
be made. 

30. Do you consider that under the new competition tool the Commission should be able to: 

Yes 

No 

Not applicable /no relevant 
experience or knowledge 

*• Make non-binding 
recommendations to 
companies (e.g. proposing 
codes of conducts and best 
practices) 

*• Inform and make 
recommendations/proposals 
to sectorial regulators 

*• Inform and make 
legislative 
recommendations 

*• Impose remedies on 
companies to deal with 
identified and demonstrated 

14 

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Yes 

No 

Not applicable /no relevant 
experience or knowledge 

structural competition 
problems 

* 30.1. Please explain your answers indicating why you consider that the new competition tool 
should include or not include the options above. 

Besides the already developed explanation that we consider that there is not a need for a NCT, which 
inherently implies a constant contraposition to every aspect that involves the tool itself, this particular 
question needs to be assessed considering that the NCT potential legislation is actually enacted. 

According to the IIA the NCT would be complementary to the already existing competition legislation, 
which implies that they would, in certain measure, contend with  each other, in specific situations for 
determining with legal instrument would be applied, having in consideration that, according to the IIA, 
the NCT would only be applicable where there is a gap in traditional legislation that could not (at least 
effectively) be resolved. Alongside the uncertainty and risks that this reality creates to companies, the 
main difference between the instruments, at least the one that is transversal to all the Options proposed 
in the IIA, is that while the NCT could impose its structural and behavioral measures before the finding 
of an infringement, legitimated (allegedly) by an early and faster intervention, before the competition 
structural problem occurs. Meanwhile, the existing regulatory framework requires the need to find an 
infringement to impose remedies. 

Analysing the fourth point, it looks like there is a confluence between the two legislative instruments. 
However, this is merely apparent, the reality is even worse, because as predicted by the NCT IIA the 
legal basis for the new competition tool would be Articles 103 and 114 TFEU. Nonetheless, it is evident 
that the scope of Article 114, regarding it being an appropriate legal basis for approximation measures, 
is settled on the fact that it removes or prevents distortions of competition by developing conditions of 
the  functioning  of  the  internal  market.  Now,  if  we  look  at  the  aim  of  the  NCT  IIA,  it  is  not  based  on 
eliminating distortions of competition, but rather eliminating structural risks that cannot (allegedly) be 
tackled by the existing regulatory framework for competition law. 

We  also  need  to  consider  that  the  options  (from  bottom  to  top)  become  increasingly  severe  and 
empower,  each  time  more,  the  Commission.  Generally  speaking,  we  come  from  a  position  that 
considers that it is disproportionate that the Commission should have the power to impose structural or 
behavioral remedies without the need of having to find an infringement, based solely on the finding of 
a  structural  competition  problem.  Alongside  the  different  view  on  current  structural  competition 
problems, with the market constantly evolving, anything defined as structural problem could be tackled 
by one these options, which is extremely discretionary and would definitely culminate in an uncertainty 
for companies to know whether they are or not in such situations, resulting in decreased incentive to 
invest and prejudicing the consumers.  

31. Do you consider that in order to address the aforementioned structural competition 
problems, the Commission should be able to impose appropriate and proportionate remedies 
on companies? If yes, which? 

15 

 
  
 
 
Yes 

No 

Not applicable /no relevant experience or 
knowledge 

*• Non-
structural 
remedies 
(such as 
obligation to 
abstain from 
certain 
commercial 
behaviour) 

*• Structural 
remedies (for 
instance, 
divestitures 
or granting 
access to key 
infrastructure 
or inputs) 

*• Hybrid 
remedies 
(containing 
different 
types of 
obligations 
and bans) 

* 31.1. Please explain your answer and why you indicated or not indicated the remedies listed 
above. 

The question itself can be perceived as paradoxical: of course, that if the Commission should be able 
to impose remedies through the NCT (contradictorily to what we defend), they should be appropriate 
and proportionate. Now, the real question that poses is that if it is possible for the Commission to pursue 
these objectives with the intended scope of the NCT. 

Contrasting with the normal sieves of the application of Articles 101 and 102, it is evident the absence 
of  a  sense  of  proportionality,  much  more  evident  when  we  realize  that  contrary  to  the  existing  legal 
framework, there is not a need to find an infringement. An “early intervention” whenever the Commission 
concludes there is a “threat to competition” does not suffice. 

Another  consideration,  attentive  to  NCT  IIA  reference  that  even  though  the  Commission  is  being 
enabled  to  impose  behavioural  and  structural  remedies,  it  would  not    impose  fines  “and  thus  not 
generate rights to launch damage claims”. This situation leaves the impression that by the fact that the 
Commission does not impose fines it is being “helpful” towards the undertakings. Nonetheless, we must 

16 

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
take  in  consideration  that  by  mandating  structural  remedies  that  could  imply  the  unbundling  of 
undertakings and restructuration’s of business models and industries, these impositions are far more 
prejudicial to enterprises than paying fines. The Commission would be empowered to impose significant 
market changes in the European Union. 

Finally,  concerning  this  aspect,  we  cannot  forget  that  the  proposed  NCT  has  the  ability  to  propose 
stricter remedies, even without having to find any infringement or the indication of one. Comparing two 
potential  situations  we  could  have  scenarios  where  an  undertaking  after  the  Commission  finds  an 
infringement that falls into the existing regulatory framework may adopt a commitment in the terms of 
Article 9 of Regulation 1/2003, while an undertaking without a dominant position and without committing 
any wrongdoing could be subjected to impositions regarding structural or behavioural remedies. This 
means that companies might face stricter remedies, with less procedural rights, without committing any 
infringement. Besides being outrageously disproportionate this situation does not meet the standards 
of Fundamental and Constitutional rights. 

It is also imperative that we realise that the introduction of a NCT, as described by the IIA, would surely 
constitute  a  lot  of  legal  uncertainty  and  incoherencies,  constricting  the  innovation  and  dynamism 
potential for enterprises that would be limited or even punished for being successful and outdoing their 
competitors,  even  though  fair  competition,  solely  because  they  could  became  “market  dominant”. 
Ultimately, this situation would turn into a vicious cycle leading to disincentive to invest, therefore less 
innovation and competition, with the spill-over effects to smaller and new-coming enterprises, resulting 
in far worst conditions for consumers.  

* 32. Do you consider that certain structural competition problems can only be dealt with by 
structural remedies, such as the divestment of a business? 

Yes 

No 

Not applicable /no relevant experience or knowledge 

Other 

    E. Institutional set-up of a new competition tool 

The questions in this section seek feedback on what features and set-up the new competition tool 
should have. 

* 33. Do you consider that enforcement of the new competition tool by the Commission would require 
adequate and appropriate investigative powers in order to be effective? 

•  Yes 

o  No 

o  Not applicable /no relevant experience or knowledge 

17 

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
* 34. Do you consider that the new competition tool should be subject to binding legal deadlines? 

•  Yes 

o  No 

o  Not applicable /no relevant experience or knowledge 

* 35. Do you consider that the new competition tool should include the possibility to impose interim 
measures in order to pre-empt irreparable harm? 

o  Yes 

•  No 

o  Not applicable /no relevant experience or knowledge 

* 36. Do you consider that the new competition tool should include the possibility to accept voluntary 
commitments by the companies operating in the markets concerned to address identified and 
demonstrated structural competition problems? 

•  Yes 

o  No 

o  Not applicable /no relevant experience or knowledge 

* 37. Do you consider that during the proceedings the companies operating in the markets concerned, 
or suppliers and customers of those companies should have the possibility to comment on the 
findings of the existence of a structural competition problem before the final decision? 

• 

Yes 

o  No 

o  Not applicable /no relevant experience or knowledge 

* 38. Do you consider that during the proceedings the companies operating in the markets concerned, 
or suppliers and customers of those companies should have the possibility to comment on the 
appropriateness and proportionality of the envisaged remedies? 

o  Yes 

•  No 

o  Not applicable /no relevant experience or knowledge 

* 39. Do you consider that the new competition tool should be subject to adequate procedural 
safeguards, including judicial review? 

•  Yes 

18 

 
  
 
o  No 

o  Not applicable /no relevant experience or knowledge 

 F. Concluding questions and document upload 

40. Taking into consideration the parallel consultation on a proposal in the context of 
the Digital Services Act package for ex ante rules to ensure that markets characterised by 
large platforms with significant network effects acting as gatekeepers remain fair and 
contestable for innovators, businesses, and new market entrants, please rate the suitability of 
each option below to address market issues raised by online platform ecosystems. 

Not 
applicable 
/No 
relevant 
experience 
or 
knowledge 

Not 
effective 

Somewhat 
effective 

Sufficiently 
effective 

Very 
effective 

Most 
effective 

*1.Current 
competition 
rules are enough 
to address 
issues raised in 
digital markets 

*2.There is a 
need for an 
additional 
regulatory 
framework 
imposing 
obligations and 
prohibitions that 
are generally 
applicable to all 
online platforms 
with gatekeeper 
power 

*3. There is a 
need for an 
additional 
regulatory 
framework 
allowing for the 
possibility to 
impose tailored 
remedies on 

19 

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Not 
applicable 
/No 
relevant 
experience 
or 
knowledge 

Not 
effective 

Somewhat 
effective 

Sufficiently 
effective 

Very 
effective 

Most 
effective 

individual large 
online platforms 
with gatekeeper 
power on a case-
by-case basis. 

*4. There is a 
need for a New 
Competition 
Tool allowing to 
address 
structural risks 
and lack of 
competition in 
(digital) markets 
on a case-by-
case basis 

*5. There is a 
need for 
combination of 
two or more of 
the options 2 to 
4. 

* 40.1. Please explain which of the options, or combination of these, in your view would be 
suitable and sufficient to address the contestability issues arising in the online platforms 
ecosystems.. 
Throughout the questionnaire we maintained a consistent position defending that there is not a need 
for the introduction of a NCT. Quite contrarily, we asserted several times that the existing toolbox is 
still adequate and sufficient. Therefore, the suitable option, amongst those presented, could only be 
the one that predicts that “current competition rules are enough to address issues raised in digital 
markets”. 

In fact, to date, there is a lack of evidence-based claims that the TFEU leaves a material enforcement 
gap regarding anti-competitive unilateral conduct, even in the scenarios described by the Commission. 
As  previously  shown,  contrarily  to  what  the  Commission  indicates,  the  existing  framework  for  EU 
competition law has proven to be singularly effective at treating new and complex issues, even those 
that  potentially  arise  in  digital-enabled  markets  -  two-sided-markets,  zero-price  factors  –  between 
others, like shown in several court-cases (see above point 7.1). The Commission could ponder an active 
increase  in  the  use  of  these  current  tools.  Further  we  believe  that  zero-pricing  market  may  not  be 

20 

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
important as a reason for a structural competition problem. Zero-pricing is only a way in which services 
and products are provided, and this is usually the common case in digital markets. Besides, in a zero-
pricing market, the customers are usually sensitive to price changes, which means that the undertaking 
will quickly lose customers once they charge a price. 

Having  that  said,  it  is  therefore  recommendable  that  the  Commission,  before  committing  to  a  big 
regulatory reform, should do a more efficient use of the existing competition tools under Articles 101 
and  102  TFEU,  as  well  as  the  merger  control  regime  that  it  has  at  its  disposal,  which  constitutes  a 
sufficient way to resolve main competition concerns across markets (even those extended to the digital 
era). Moreover, the current “toolbox” has much more potential than what it is recognized for by the “NCT 
IIA”. Mainly through the application of the Regulation 1/2003 which implements the rules on competition 
laid  down  in  Articles  101 and  102 TFEU, especially Articles  7,  8 (Interim  Measures) and 17 (Sector 
Inquiries).  All  these  articulated  with  increasing  national  legislative  initiatives  and  EU  legislation 
concerning specific sectors competition rules form a well-oiled mechanism that has proven its efficiency 
throughout decades. 

Even if this was not  the case, the NCT has structural problems of its own: Starting by poorly identifying 
the  structural  competition  problems  that  would  represent  its  cause,  as  it  was  argued  in  point  7.1; 
followed by an inaccurate prediction or even potential to go beyond the existing European competition 
legislation,  concentrated  in  three  situations:  the  overlapping  of  the  existing  regulatory  framework 
(Articles 101 and 102 TFEU and merger control regime); the overlapping of the Commission proposed 
ex  ante  regulatory  tool  and  even  an  overlapping  with  Member  States  (expected)  national  legislative 
initiatives. It is concerning that the NCT roadmap fails to explain the relationship between an NCT and 
Articles 101 and 102 TFEU and that a number of questions in the NCT questionnaire ask whether these 
Articles are suitable and sufficiently effective. This is all the more so because the options set out in the 
NCT roadmap appear to target exclusively or to a very substantial extent single firm conduct but without 
providing the substantive and procedural safeguards enshrined in Article 102 TFEU. Absent adequate 
standards and safeguards, this creates an incentive to bring cases under the NCT instead of Article 102 
TFEU. 

Other problems consist, as stressed in point 31.1 in the far-reaching scope of the NCT which would 
constantly be battling with some Fundamental and Constitutional Rights. Finally, yet another problem 
that can be pinned is the lack of the legal basis that supports and legitimates the New Competition 
Tool.  

Question 41 or 42 

ICC is against the  introduction of a new competition tool. Moreover, it is extremely far-reaching and  
heralds a paradigm shift by calling into question the current fundamental principles of competition law.  

ICC supports enforcement objectives that are aimed at stopping specific infringements of competition 
law.  However,  the  proposals  of  the  Commission  (options  1  to  4)  do  not  relate  to  infringements  of 
competition law and related possible inadequacies of enforcement of competition law, but rather they 
partly (options 3 and 4) address issues below the radar of competition law scrutiny, in particular below 
the established intervention thresholds for the control of abuse of a dominant position, and outside of 
concrete infringements (all options), whereby there is even talk of a structural reorganisation of markets 
and the market players by the Commission ("market by design").  

In  view  of  the  ongoing  and  open  question,  if  there  is  a  need  for  action,  the  open  and  wide  circle  of 
addressees, a dubious legal basis and, above all, serious problems under EU law, competition policy, 
constitutional law and the rule of law, particularly with regard to the planned structural and non-abusive 

21 

 
  
 
powers of intervention in all four options mentioned, ICC is against the four options and is in favour of 
retaining the existing competition regime ("baseline scenario") and its consistent application. 

ICC does not believe that there is a need for the NCT to ensure fair and competitive markets with a 
view to delivering lower prices and higher quality, as well as more choice and innovation to 
consumers, because the existing instruments in the European Commission’s toolbox (enforcement of 
Articles 101 and 102 TFEU) are sufficient for this purpose. If at all, a smarter and more efficient 
application of the existing tools is required. 

The introduction of the NCT instrument bears the inherent risk of creating legal uncertainty and 
causing unwanted side- and spillover effects which could have a chilling effect on the competitiveness 
of companies.   

New digital business models and platform solutions are continuing to emerge, and this innovation and 
development should not be limited by restrictive regulations. The introduction of the NCT would create 
a lot of legal uncertainty and likely lead to a limitation of development and innovation, in particular if 
highly innovative companies could later be “punished” for their success. This would be 
counterproductive for competition and thus for customers’ opportunity to receive the best and most 
innovative products. 

However, in the case that it is implemented, please find below our position on how we believe the  tool 
should operate and be used by the Commission. 

In reference to question 33: 

The enforcement of the NCT by the Commission should require adequate and appropriate investigative 
power  in  order  for  the  decisions  to  be  based  on  precise  and  reliable  information  and  objective  and 
robust  economic  analysis.  Investigative  powers  will  enable  the  Commission  to  assess  the  market, 
understand its dynamics, and more importantly, to make the most appropriate and effective decisions. 
Moreover,  with  the  possibility  of  these  investigative  measures,  the  remedies  imposed  by  the 
Commission will be more readily accepted by the stakeholders and will face less criticism if they are 
based on sound information. 

In conclusion, the investigative power created by the NCT is necessary to help protect the Commission 
against accusations of acting arbitrarily and will help enhance the legitimacy of its decisions, while at 
the same time reassure all affected parties that the Commission’s analysis was fully informed. 

In reference to question 34: 

ICC considers that the  NCT should be subject to binding legal deadlines for two reasons: efficiency 
and greater legal certainty. 

Indeed, we understand that the purpose of the NCT is to tackle structural risks to competition, especially 
in quickly evolving markets.  Therefore, to be effective on dynamic markets such as digital platforms, 
the Commission must act quickly before the structural damage is no longer reversible and/or before the 
dynamic has made the approach of the Commission irrelevant. 

Moreover,  being subject to binding  legal deadlines also implies legal certainty for stakeholders. The 
firms  will  know  how  long  the  Commission’s  investigation  will  last,  and  the  shareholders  will  have  a 
certain predictability regarding the future of their company and their share prices. Indeed, a tool that 
enables the Commission to impose dramatic and even structural remedies  would  greatly impact the 
value of the companies. In the tech sector where investors must have an exit plan,  it is essential to 
avoid a ‘sword of Damocles’ threatening the future value of a company for years.  

22 

 
  
 
Based on feedback from the British Competition and Markets Authority experience, market investigation 
and review processes lasting for years are likely to happen.   

In reference to question 35: 

ICC does not consider that the NCT should include the possibility of imposing interim measures in order 
to pre-empt irreparable harm. 

Indeed,  the  NCT  would  allow  the  Commission  to  impose  measures  on  companies  that  have  not 
committed any anti-competitive practices. Today, to impose interim measures, the Commission must at 
least prove the existence of a prima facie illegal behavior; this test would not even exist in the case of 
the NCT.  

Moreover,  because  of  they  are  based  on  an  in-depth  investigation,  interim  measures  can  be 
pronounced even if unwarranted. That is especially dangerous given that they can slow down or even 
impede the development of a growing business. This can lead to a loss of dynamism in the company, 
a loss of income, or even an exit from the market, those consequences being unacceptable.    

In light of the above, ICC suggests, instead of allowing for interim measures, to use shorter (but still 
reasonable) deadlines when the structural risks to competition are imminent. In any event, in an interim 
measures NCT framework these must be subject to a number of safeguards such as judicial approval 
by the EU General Court, and subject to a legal test similar to that used widely by courts for an interim 
injunction – that is (1) significant likelihood that a permanent remedy will be imposed (2) significant risk 
of harm that won’t be able to be reversed, (3) balance of convenience in favour of intervention, and (4) 
full opportunity for the parties affected to be heard.  

In reference to question 36: 

ICC considers that the NCT should include the possibility of accepting voluntary commitments by the 
companies  operating  in  the  markets  concerned  to  address  identified  and  demonstrated  structural 
competition problems. 

This will speed up the proceedings and the measures will be more effective. Moreover, it will lower the 
cost  of  the  Commission’s  investigations.    However,  as  in  commitments  considered  in  the  context  of 
mergers  or  behavioural  infringements,  the  Commission  will  need  to  be  satisfied  that  the  voluntary 
commitments are sufficient to resolve the concerns raised, do not raise material additional concerns on 
their own, and are able to be monitored in the medium to long term. The Commission should plan to 
consult widely on any measures before they are accepted. 

In reference to question 37: 

ICC  considers  that  during  the  proceedings,  the  companies  operating  in  the  markets  concerned,  or 
suppliers and customers of those companies, should have the possibility to comment on the findings of 
the existence of a structural competition problem before the final decision. 

Indeed,  a  robust  market  test  including  all  stakeholders  in  the  market  will  enable  the  Commission  to 
assess, both the existence of a structural risk to competition and the most effective remedies to tackle 
the issue. 

23 

 
  
 
Moreover, the Commission will have to take into account the view of the suppliers, the competitors, and 
the demand in order to make the final decision. 

The market test should be the Commission’s main investigative tool. Further it is surely sensible and 
necessary to allow affected businesses to comment  on remedies that have a  major impact on them 
before  they  are  imposed  –  the  experience  in  the  UK  is  that  this  is  an  extremely  important  and 
constructive part of the UK regime, where much of the engagement occurs to try to shape a sensible 
remedy  that  resolves  the  competition  concern  but  limits  the  risk  of  disproportionate  and  unforeseen 
consequences.  It does take some time, but this trade off tends to be worth it rather than the market 
having  to  deal  with  disproportionately  expensive  or  ineffective  interventions,  or  their  unforeseen 
consequences, for years to come. 

In reference to question 38: 

ICC  considers  that  during  the  proceedings,  the  companies  operating  in  the  markets  concerned,  or 
suppliers  and  customers  of  those  companies,  should  have  the  possibility  to  comment  on  the 
appropriateness and proportionality of the envisaged remedies. 

We consider that consulting the market stakeholders to assess if there is a structural risk to competition 
in a market is a necessary requirement. Still, consulting them on the appropriateness and proportionality 
of the remedies envisaged by the Commission will increase the length of the proceedings. The aim of 
the NCT is to act swiftly to readjust the market before it is too late. It seems like this consultation will 
have the opposite effect of the one expected.  

The Commission should thus limit the stakeholder’s comments to the existence of structural risks to 
competition. 

In reference to question 39: 

ICC considers that the  NCT should  be subject to adequate procedural safeguards, including judicial 
review. 

It is important to emphasise that the NCT would be used by the Commission without any infringement 
of competition law. The Commission would be at risk of violating the companies’ fundamental rights, 
such as the presumption of innocence and right to property. The EU is founded on the rule of law and 
there are strong traditions in EU competition law for ensuring procedural fairness and protecting rights 
of  defense.  The  envisaged  NCT  would  be  highly  intrusive  and  far  reaching.  It  would  empower  the 
Commission  to  impose  intrusive  behavioral  and  possibly  even  structural  remedies.    Such  measures 
would  therefore  need  to  be  subject  to  strong  internal  checks  and  balances,  as  well  as  procedural 
safeguards that protect rights of defense effectively.  

Therefore, procedural safeguards such as full access to the file and full rights of defence, including the 
right to be heard orally are essential to legitimize the use of this NCT by the Commission and to protect 
the companies against any arbitrary use. 

The NCT should  also consider  as a subsidiary alternative  procedural safeguard, to the  Commission 
requesting such decisions from the EU General Court, the use of an independent decision-making panel 
where initial concerns are identified and an in-depth review is warranted. This is a fundamental feature 
of the UK markets regime, where the Phase 1 review (a market study) is carried out by CMA staff under 
the supervision of the executive of the CMA, but a Phase 2 review (an in-depth market investigation, 

24 

 
  
 
which can result in remedies) is  led by  a  panel of  independent  experts  appointed  by the CMA, with 
support from CMA staff.  This independence of decision-making helps the CMA process be seen as 
generally fair and largely insulated from allegations of political interference or bias. The ICC expects a 
similar process could be a significant mitigant to similar concerns in the EU. 

In  the  same  line,  judicial  oversight  of  the  Commission  proceedings  and  its  decisions  is  essential  to 
ensure a perception of high quality and objective decision-making and respect for the companies’ rights.  
For example, core to the credibility of the UK market investigations process is a right to request review 
by the specialist Competition Appeals Tribunal, comprising experienced judges and other experts with 
significant experience  in competition law and economics. This appellate body  has the expertise  and 
resource to engage in detail with the detailed economic analysis carried out by the CMA in its market 
investigation, and thereby helps to ensure that a review is based on the merits of the underlying factual 
issues, rather than on narrow procedural and legal grounds of judicial review. 

ICC  also  suggests  that  an  appeal  against  the  Commission’s  decision  should  have,  in  principle,  an 
automatic  suspensory  effect,  unless  any  interventions  being  made  are  limited  in  nature  and  easily 
reversible.   

But ICC’s proposal goes further. Given the danger of harm to fundamental rights, the risk of decisions 
being (or being seen to be) politically motivated, and probability that interventions motivated by fixing 
issues of competition could easily affect a number of other policy areas (including, for example, freedom 
of speech, press freedom, privacy, taxation and geopolitical matters) we propose that the Commission 
should not receive the power to  pronounce itself decisions such as imposing remedies. Instead, the 
Commission  should  have  to  request  such  decisions  from  the  EU  General  Court.  This  will  avoid  any 
issues with the impartiality of the Commission. 

In any event, as detailed above, ICC is against the implementation of the NCT. 

42. Do you have any further comments on this initiative on aspects not covered by the previous 
questions ? 

One  of  the  apparently  central  structural  competition  problems  that  the  Commission  aims  to  fix  are 
“Gatekeeper scenarios”. After a meticulous analysis of The Special Advisors’ report and the Inception 
Impact Assessment itself, there is an overall indication that the main focus of the Commission regarding 
this aspect are large online platforms (not necessarily dominant but with extensive market power) that 
control the platform ecosystem being “the market dynamics only determined by the gatekeeper”. The 
notions  appointed  by  the  Commission  are  particularly  directed  to  the  fact  that  these  “gatekeepers” 
control the market and are able to eliminate competitors due to its monopolized position.  

Also, as some of the Options described in the IIA predict, there is a predisposition from the Commission 
to departure from the pre-conditions incorporated in the existing regulatory framework, more precisely 
Articles 101 and 102, for the need to establish dominance, that would accelerate the procedures by not 
being limited to normal sieves of determining the dominant position through a fairly archaic process.  

In this context, the real question is raised: what we have in our hands is really a gap within the current 
EU legislation that exempts some “gatekeepers” from the competition law? Or this question only 
emerges due to the fact that the main tool for assessing dominance must updated? Of course, that 
the control of considerable market shares conjugated with entry barriers and concentration are good 
indicators of market power, but if the problem is that its concentration of market shares doesn’t reach 

25 

 
  
 
the value of 40%, maybe we should change this paradigm, not basing the establishment of a 
dominant position on the assessment of market shares, but rather on more dynamic and modernized 
evidences. Therefore, if we look, for instance, to the definition of dominance in case-law Hoffman La 
Roche, that is more integrative, concerned with the actual strength presented by an undertaking that 
would potentially cease relevant competition on a given market and have an “appreciable influence on 
the conditions under which that competition will develop” the gatekeeper position could fall under this 
standard, and therefore, we would be re-railed to normal EU competition law procedures. Having that 
said, before a big legislative reform with such undetermined impacts in the economy and the 
consumers, there should be a further assessment on the question presented. 

26 

 
  
 
 
 
EC consultation on the need for a new competition tool 

ICC General Comments   

8 September 2020 

1. 

Introduction 

One  must  acknowledge  the  modernisation  of  the  world  and  its  economy.  The  interactions  between 
companies and consumers have become much more facilitated due to the digitalisation of processes. 
Everyone is a click away from everything. Nonetheless, this new reality is not only apparent in the Digital 
Markets  but  has  spread  over  other  (more  traditional)  markets.  In  this  regard  it  is  imperative  that 
competition remains transparent and inclusive. The existence of an established regulation that support 
this phenomenon while ensuring fair and competitive market conditions is crucial to preserve innovation 
and to protect consumers welfare. 

2. 

 New Competition Tool – Inception Impact Assessment 

This reality then raises the question of knowing, as said by the Commission Vice-President Vestager, 
whether “the competition policy and rules are fit for the modern economy”1. In this regard, the European 
Commission points out  a broad range of structural competition problems that can be agglomerated in 
two  categories:  “Structural  risks  for  competition”  referring  to  “scenarios  where  certain  market 
characteristics  (…)  and  the  conduct  of  the  companies  in  the  markets  concerned  create  a  threat  for 
competition” either trough “the creation of powerful market players with an entrenched market and/or 
gatekeeper position (…)”2 or “unilateral strategies by non-dominant companies to monopolise a market 
through anti-competitive means”3. Or, Structural lack of competition, referring to “markets displaying 
systemic failures going beyond the conduct of a particular company with market power due to certain 
structural features such as high concentration and entry barriers, consumer lock-in, lack of access to 
data or data accumulation, and oligopolistic market structures with an increased risk for tacit collusion 
(…)”4. According to the Commission these structural problems consist in gaps that the current regulation 
cannot  fill  (at  all  or  effectively).  This  concerns  “the  baseline  scenario”  -  consisting  in  the  current  EU 
competition law framework through the application of Articles 101 and 102 TFEU.  

In this context, the Commission took the initiative to present policy options for stakeholders to consider. 
These should be applied complementarily to existing regulations: they have in common the fact that in 
all these options the Commission would be able to act without the need to find an infringement. Options 
(1)  and  (2)  share  the  fact  that  there  is  still  a  need  for  the  undertaking  to  be  considered  dominant, 
something  that  is  not  necessary  in  options  (3)  and  (4)  which  means  that  in  these  scenarios,  the 
Commission can (hypothetically) impose structural remedies to undertakings without the need of finding 
an infringement and without the need for them to be considered dominant, intervening beforehand. In 
options (1) and (3) there’s a horizontal scope, meaning that this tool would be applied to all markets, 

1 Inception Impact Assessment – Part A. (Context)  
2 Ibid. 
3 Ibid. 
4 Ibid. 

27 

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
contrary to options (2) and (4) where the use of the tool would be limited in scope to sectors with the 
determined characteristics (digital or digital-enabled markets). 

3. 

 Problems 

Having this broad sense of the questions presented by the “NCT IIA”, one can now focus on some of 
the issues that the introduction of this tool could have on  the EU competition policy, whether it is for 
the  consumers  or  for  the  willingness  to  invest,  directly  affecting  innovation  and  competition  itself.  A 
larger emphasis will be given to certain topics that will be densified: (i) Overlap of Regulations (within 
the Digital Services Act, colliding with the ex ante regulation; also colliding with the “baseline scenario” 
of Articles 101 and article 102 of the TFUE and national legislation), (ii) the (“far-reaching”) Scope of 
the  “New  Competition  Tool”,  (iii)  Conflict  with  Fundamental  and  Constitutional  Rights;  and  (iv) 
Insufficiency of Legal Basis. 

3.1 Overlap of Regulations 

This specific topic raises several questions of its own: Is there (according to the structural competition 
risks presented by the Commission) a gap that needs to be filled with a new toolbox as the Commission 
proposes?  Or  is  the  current  legal  framework  sufficiently  flexible  and  malleable  to  be  applied 
transversally to the modern digitally-enabled markets? If enacted, what would the thresholds between 
the current legislation and the “NCT” be without them overlapping? And between the “NCT” and the ex 
ante regulatory tool? National legislative initiatives must also be considered in this regard. 

3.1.1 

Is there really a “gap”? 

3.1.1.1 The existing toolbox is adequate and sufficient 

As seen, the Commission identifies two types of structural competition problems (as  shown above – 
point 2) consisting in “structural risks for competition” and “structural market failure”5. Nonetheless, to 
date,  there  is  a  lack  of  evidence-based  claims  that  the  TFEU  leaves  a  material  enforcement  gap 
regarding anticompetitive unilateral conduct, even in the scenarios described by the Commission. In 
fact,  according  to  Article  102  TFEU,  the  Commission  has  clear  powers  and  the  authority  to  impose 
behavioral and structural remedies when there is a breach of the Article itself. Also, the European Courts 
have systematically considered that unilateral conduct is only applicable, according to the scope of EU 
competition law, if the undertaking is dominant. 

Considering this, contrary to what the Commission indicates, the existing framework for EU competition 
law has proven to be singularly effective at treating new and complex issues, even those that arise in 
digital-enabled markets - two-sided-markets, zero-price factors – between others, like shown in several 
cases:  Case  AT.  39740  Google  Search  (Shopping)  that  confronted  fair  new  theories  of  harm  - 
leveraging  strategies;  Case  AT.  40099  –  Google  Android  and  Case  M.8124  Microsoft/LinkedIn 
(tying);  Case  AT.  40411  –  Google  AdSense  (exclusivity  requirements),  even  cases  of  economic 
dependency/relative market power (General Motors Continental NV v Commission, C-26/75). 

5 Ibid. 

28 

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
In parallel the Commission may ponder, if so deemed required, the review and update of various of its 
Guidelines  and  Notices  (e.g.  the  current  consultation  into  the  Market  Definition  Notice,  and  similarly 
support updates to the Horizontal and Vertical Guidelines and 102 Enforcement Priorities Guidelines) 
to ensure they are fit for purpose and reflect the new challenges brought about by modernisation and 
digitalisation of the economy. 

Having  that  said,  ICC  suggests  that  the  Commission,  before  committing  to  a  big  regulatory  reform, 
should make a more efficient and effective use of the existing competition tools under Articles 101 and 
102 TFEU as well as the merger control regime that it has at its disposal, considering that both constitute 
a  sufficient  way  to  resolve  main  competition  concerns  across  markets  (even  those  extended  to  the 
digital era). 

Moreover, the current, so called, “toolbox” has much more potential than what it is recognised for by 
the “NCT IIA”. Mainly through the application of the Regulation 1/2003 which implements the rules on 
competition  laid  down  in  Articles  101  and  102  TFEU.  Article  8/1  of  Regulation  1/2003  provides  the 
possibility for the Commission, on its own initiative, to order provisional measures in “cases of urgency 
due to the risk of serious and irreparable damage to competition”. Contrary to what the Commission 
proposes with the “NCT”, this provisional measure  dependent on the finding of an infringement: on one 
hand this fact supports the legitimacy to impose  interim measures, on the other  hand, it enables an 
intervention  before  a  “serious  and  irreparable  damage  to  competition”  occurs,  making  it  possible  to 
counter competition problems even in this modernised digital market. Nonetheless, accounts show that 
the Commission has rarely made use of this prospect. 

Taking into consideration that there is not a detailed configuration of what the NCT would look like, it is 
indeed expected that any remedy to be imposed, regardless of the Option (between those provided in 
the IIA), must be accompanied by a market investigation exactly to determine the structural competition 
problem. In this regard, the information and disclosure requirements will have to be analogous to those 
predicted  in  Article  17  of  Regulation  1/2003  for  the  sector  inquiries.  In  fact,  considering  that  this 
instrument already exists, it raises the question if there is a need to create an uncertain (arbitrary) direct 
disclosure power for the Commission, that is in its core intrusive and can lead to bigger problems like 
exposing trade secrets, with the added vicissitude that, by principle, in every Option presented by the 
Commission, there would be no need to find an indication of an infringement. This situation presents 
itself  as  very  disproportionate  and  unfair.  Therefore,  even  though  sector  inquiries  do  not  predict  the 
imposition of remedies, this instrument has shown to have an effect on market actors and allows the 
Commission  to  conduct  thorough  examinations  into  determined  sectors.  Clearly,  if  an  infringement 
detrimental to competition is found, the Commission has the possibility either to impose structural or 
behavioral remedies (Article 7) or to make a commitment binding (Article 9). Consequently, instead of 
suggesting new “tools”, ICC believes that there should be a greater implementation (and enforcement) 
of the existing toolbox that proves to be sufficient. 

Furthermore,  Article  7  of  the  Regulation  1/2003  must  be  considered.  This  article  empowers  the 
Commission, by acting on a complaint or on its own initiative, to adopt behavioral or structural remedies 
“which  are  proportionate  to  the  infringement  committed  and  necessary  to  bring  the  infringement 
effectively to an end”.  It raises no questions that the core of the applicability of this article resides on 
the  finding  of  an  infringement  committed  by  the  undertaking  -  an  abusive  behavior  regarding  its 
dominant position - and its purpose to cease an infringement of competition law. On the contrary, the 
undescribed remedies that emerge throughout the Options presented by the Commission according to 
the NCT IIA are not limited. As already seen, there would not be (in any option) a requirement to put an 
end  to  an  identified  and  specific  infringement  of  competition  law.  The  consequences  of  not  limiting 

29 

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
materially a remedy to the cessation of an identified competition infringement would be a far-reaching 
empowerment of the Commission, acting as a regulator, with the ability to reconstruct entire markets 
and unbundle enterprises. The inexistence of objectively delimited remedies would give a wide margin 
of discretion to the Commission which could imply the characterisation of determined business conducts 
and business models harmful to the competition that currently are seen as an expression of normal and 
pertinent  performance  by  enterprises.  This  conclusion  leads  to  the  fact  that,  besides  the  already 
predictable effects of lack of investment, innovation and uncertainty that harms the consumers the most, 
it  is  against  the  established  principle  in  antitrust  law  that  internal  company  growth  should  not  be 
restricted which, in any case, would be  possible with the enactment of this proposition,  by imposing 
remedies independent of abuse of dominance or even a dominant position. 

Moreover,  besides  the  unestablished  evidence  showing  the  need  for  a  new  a  tool,  each  time  more, 
possible  competition  problems  are  in  the  course  of  being  addressed  via  recent  EU  legislation,  for 
instance,  the  Regulation  2019/1150  “on  promoting  fairness  and  transparency  for  business  users  of 
online intermediation services” and the ongoing review of the E-Commerce Directive. Adding to all this, 
an underlying theme in the IIA is the need for timely intervention that would supposedly be brought by 
the NCT allowing  the Commission to impose remedies and “solve problems” in a much more (allegedly) 
rapid way. However, if we observe a similar instrument - the UK system of market investigation – it is 
rather obvious that quick results should not be expected, since most procedures inducted by CMA do 
not offer the timely response the IIA is seeking.  

3.1.1.2 Poorly identified problems by the Commission 

“Tipping” Markets 
One of the key points that the NCT IIA identifies as a structural competition problem, are certain markets 
that are prone to “tipping”. The risks that “tipping” supposedly present emerge from the fact that certain 
powerful market participants (that exhibit a gatekeeper position) become so influential in that market 
that they acquire the monopoly of profits and consumers and a position which is almost invulnerable to 
competition.  The  alleged  aim  of  the  NCT  is  exactly  to  prevent  these  situations,  by  intervening 
beforehand, imposing structural and behavioral remedies. Criticism can be made regarding this aspect: 
firstly, it is very rare any enforcement practice that relates with this subject, much rarer a case law from 
the  ECJ.  This  is  a  matter  that  has  not  been  adequately  studied  and  analysed  to  legitimate  the 
Commission’s  extensive  empowerment.  Therefore,  “tipping”  markets  as  one  of  the  frontal  structural 
competition problems that needs to be tackled, even consisting on the basis for the introduction of a 
new legislation, seem very dubious, at least. 

More importantly, “tipping markets” are not necessarily problematic. In fact, it has to be considered that 
the idiosyncrasy of “tipping” is related to the increased value that users acquire from network effects. In 
markets  with  such  characteristics  preventing  “tipping”  would  be  nothing  but  a  pure  restriction  of 
performance  competition,  preventing  the  internal  growth  of  businesses,  meaning  worse  results  for 
consumers. This practice cannot be distinguished from successful integral growth as the outcome of 
competition  on  its  merits.  Therefore,  an  intervention  regarding  “tipping  markets”  is  realistically  not 
needed, only being justified where an undertaking has critical market power and abuses it, but for those 
types of situations already fall under existing competition legislation.   

Leveraging into adjacent markets 
Another  structural  competition  problem  indicated  by  the  NCT  IIA  is  the  fact  that  a  not  necessarily 
dominant company with market power may extend its market position to related markets. Again, this 
situation does not constitute an inherent problem and may be, in fact, an essential part of the competitive 

30 

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
process. If a company has transferable assets, skills and know-how’s, utilising those for entering a new 
area  of  activity  is  indeed  a  contributing  factor  for  better  outcomes  regarding  the  users.  This  can  be 
considered a normal  activity regarding cost reduction  and increasing the  possibilities to successfully 
enter a new market. This situation could only be problematic, justifying an intervention and perhaps the 
imposition of a remedy or a commitment by the Commission after a detailed assessment concludes that 
these practices were of an anti-competitive leveraging nature, situations that already fall into the existing 
regulatory  framework  (if  a  undertaking  is  dominant).  Only  in  these  cases  an  intervention  can  be 
considered proportionate and fair. 

“Gatekeeper position” 
One  of  the  apparently  central  structural  competition  problems  that  the  Commission  aims  to  fix  are 
“Gatekeeper  scenarios”.  This  question  must  be  evaluated  in  two  fronts:  firstly,  after  a  meticulous 
analysis of The Special Advisors’ report and the Inception Impact Assessment itself, there is an overall 
indication that the main focus of the Commission regarding this aspect are large online platforms (not 
necessarily dominant but with extensive market power and at the same the Commission is separately 
proposing  to  introduce  targeted  ex  ante  regulation  of  digital  platforms  under  the  DSA  and  these 
measures  should  be  evaluated  before  further  intervention  in  the  form  of  the  NCT)  that  control  the 
platform  ecosystem  being  “the  market  dynamics  only  determined  by  the  gatekeeper”.  The  notions 
appointed by the Commission are particularly directed to the fact that these “gatekeepers” control the 
market  and  are  able  to  eliminate  competitors  due  to  its  monopolised  position.  Also,  as  some  of  the 
Options described in the IIA predict, there is a predisposition from the Commission to departure from 
the pre-conditions incorporated in the existing regulatory framework, more precisely Articles 101 and 
102, for the need to establish dominance, that would accelerate the procedures by not being limited to 
normal sieves of determining the dominant position through a fairly archaic process.  

In this context, the real question is raised: Is what we have in our hands really a gap within the current 
EU legislation that exempts some “gatekeepers” from the competition law? Or does this question only 
emerge  due  to  the  fact  that  the  main  tool  for  assessing  dominance  must  updated  or  enforced?  Of 
course, that the control of considerable market shares conjugated with entry barriers and concentration 
are good indicators of market power, but if the problem is that its concentration of market shares does 
not    reach  the  applicable  thresholds,  maybe  this  paradigm  should  be  changed,  not  basing  the 
establishment of a dominant position on the assessment of market shares, but rather on more dynamic 
and modernised evidences. Therefore, if looked, for instance, to the definition of dominance in case-
law Hoffman La Roche, that is more integrative, concerned with the actual strength presented by an 
undertaking  that  would  potentially  cease  relevant  competition  on  a  given  market  and  have  an 
“appreciable  influence  on  the  conditions  under  which  that  competition  will  develop”  the  gatekeeper 
position  would  always  fall  under  this  standard,  and  therefore,  we  would  be  re-railed  to  normal  EU 
competition law procedures. Having that said, before a big legislative reform with such undetermined 
impacts  in  the  real  economy  and  the  consumers,  ICC  recommends  that  there  should  be  a  further 
assessment on the question presented. 

According to the “NCT IIA” the “(…) initiative is without prejudice to existing sector-specific regulation. 
It  is  also  complementary  to  the  Commission’s  new  initiative  on  platform-specific  ex  ante  regulation 
(…)”6. Nonetheless, taking in consideration the NCT IIA itself, it is very hard to conceive a complemental 
relationship  with  clear  separation  of  competence.  In  fact,  the  New  Competition  Tool  seems  to 
considerably duplicate either the existing regulatory framework of the EU, as well as the proposed ex 

6 Ibid. 

31 

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
ante regulatory tool, another measure adopted by the EU Commission, currently subjected to its own 
public consultation and even Member State legislation: 

Overlapping of the existing regulatory framework (Articles 101 and 102 TFEU) 

This is one of the central questions that needs further analysis. In fact, as previously shown, a great 
part of the “new-era digital problems” that the Commission entails to fix, seen as gaps that cannot be 
resolved (at least effectively) under the current regulatory framework are, indeed, still approachable by 
this legislation, due to its flexibility and malleability that encompasses to novel problems. Having that 
said, there is no entail (according to NCT IIA) on how the Commission could be able to separate the 
cases without being discretionary (e.g. identifying which cases would still be under the Articles 101 and 
102 TFEU, and which cases would be under the new tool). Considering that digital markets expand 
every  day,  creating  new  problems  and  conflicts  regarding  competition,  there  would  be  a  lot  of 
uncertainty on whether a given undertaking is subjected to a regulatory frame or the other, creating a 
substantial  burden  on  businesses,  potentiating  the  risk  of  inconsistent  arbitrary  outcomes  and, 
ultimately,  disincentivising  investment.  These  situations  would  be  very  detrimental  for  consumers. 
Therefore,  the  importance  of  properly  defining  the  differentiated  scope  of  application  of  (eventual) 
different  tools  should  be  stressed.  In  this  sense,  without  identifiable  boundaries  other  than  the 
Commission  could  intervene  when  there  is  a  (potential  unidentified)  structural  problem  that  poses  a 
threat to competition that cannot be resolved “in the most effective manner” by Articles 101 and 102 
TFEU,  the  New  Competition  Tool  can  only  be  recognised  as  a  (political)  shortcut  concerning  the 
established competition enforcement legislative process, which threatens its legitimacy. 

As previously stated, the existing regulatory framework also includes the EU Merger Regulation (ECMR) 
that deals with preventive market structure control (if said mergers lead to an impediment of effective 
competition). In this sense, behavioral and structural remedies that might be applied by the Commission 
(unbundling  especially),  are  prone  to  conflict  with  the  principal  of  allocation  of  competences.  This  is 
another example of the redundancy of the “NCT” and the way it deteriorates legal safety and certainty. 

Overlapping of the Commission proposed ex ante regulatory tool 
The New Competition Tool although seemingly complementary, as explained by the NCT IIA, even with 
the Commission’s new initiative (ex ante regulatory tool), does not seem to have its own place. A deeper 
analysis reveals that both tools can be treated as a regulatory instruments that would target large online 
platforms  (positions  of  dominance  or  “market  power”)  acting  as  gatekeepers,  which  benefit  from 
identified structural competition problems (network and scale effects) that need to be tackled. In this 
sense, their scope partially replicates, becoming redundant.  

Contributing to this situation of inconsistency and added burden for enterprises, is the fact that, even 
though  the  scope  of  this  initiatives  is  not  defined,  there  is  already  the  decision  that  they  will  be  (if 
enacted)  administered  by  distinct  Directorates  (CNECT  and  COMP)  creating  an  increased  risk  of 
diminished clarity on who relies the competence in a given case, again, potentiating uncertainty. 

Overlapping Member States (expected) national legislative initiatives 
Concerning the enforcement of competition rules in the EU, the Commission gave up its monopoly, by 
decentralising  EU  competition  law  enforcement  to  member  states  and  their  national  authorities  via 
Regulation 1/2003. Having that said, several EU members have already initiated legislative adaptations 
of Article 102 TFEU making its scope broader concerning unilateral conducts, therefore, falling outside 
the division of competence initially predicted with Regulation 1/2003. This is an added concern, whether 
because it makes national legislation redundant or, even worst, it may be contradictory to these national 

32 

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
regulatory initiatives. The consequences are the same: unpredictability, uncertainty and increased risks 
of inconsistent outcomes which would be nothing but detrimental for the economy and businesses and, 
ultimately, the consumers. 

3.2 The “far-reaching” Scope of the New Competition Tool 

As stated above (point 2), in all the options given by the Commission to be considered, there is not a 
need  for  the  Commission  to  find  an  infringement  of  the  law  to  be  able  to  impose  a  wide  range  of 
behavioral  and  structural  remedies.  In  options  (3)  and  (4),  inclusive,  there  would  not  have  to  be 
established abuse or even a dominant position (under Article 102 TFEU) in order for those sanctions, 
as long as they have “market power”. 

Assessing  the  data  provided  by  the  NCT  IIA,  there  is  a  manifest  insufficiency  of  a  description  that 
justifies such a panoply of regulatory arbitrary discretion by the Commission. In contrast, the proposals 
lack a very much needed detailed consideration of a system of checks and balances in these cases, in 
a way to mitigate the apparent discretionary powers that are being given to the Commission. There is 
not a defined legislative instrument, it is the Commission itself defining (eventually) what is considered 
a structural problem and also imposing the appropriate remedies. Contrasting with the normal sieves 
of the application of Articles 101 and 102, it is evident the absence of a sense of proportionality, much  
more evident when we realise that contrary to the existing legal framework, there is not a need to find 
an  infringement.  An  “early  intervention”  whenever  the  Commission  concludes  there  is  a  “threat  to 
competition” does not suffice. Even though the NCT IIA indicates that the Commission will be “taking 
into account the rights of defense and the right to judicial review”, a system of checks and balances 
needs to be a lot more densified, assuring that interventions are only prosecuted when proportionate, 
necessary, substantiated in hard evidence and, therefore, capable of addressing any perceived issues, 
which does not seem to be the case. 

Still regarding this aspect,  the NCT IIA refers that even though the Commission is being enabled to 
impose behavioral and structural remedies, it wouldn’t impose fines “and thus not generate  rights to 
launch damage claims”. This is a paradoxical situation, because it gives the impression that by the fact 
that the Commission does not impose fines it is being “helpful” towards the undertakings. Nonetheless, 
we must take in consideration that by mandating structural remedies that could imply the unbundling of 
undertakings and restructuration’s of business models and industries, these impositions are far more 
prejudicial to enterprises than paying fines. The Commission would be empowered to impose significant 
market changes in the European Union. There could also be the expectation that the “NCT” would claw 
off some burdens, more precisely the burden of proof.  

Finally, concerning this aspect,  it should  not be forgotten that  the proposed “NCT” has  the ability to 
propose  stricter  remedies,  even  without  having  to  find  any  infringement  or  the  indication  of  one. 
Comparing  two  potential  situations  we  could  have  scenarios  where  an  undertaking  after  the 
Commission  finds  an  infringement  that  falls  into  the  existing  regulatory  framework  may  adopt  a 
commitment in the terms of Article 9 of Regulation 1/2003, while an undertaking without a dominant 
position and without committing any wrongdoing could be subjected to impositions regarding structural 
or behavioral remedies. This means that companies might face stricter remedies, with less procedural 
rights without committing any infringement. Besides being outrageously disproportionate, this type of 
situation does not seem to meet the standards of Fundamental and Constitutional rights. 

33 

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
It is imperative that one realises that the introduction of a NCT, as described by the Inception Impact 
Assessment, would surely create legal uncertainty and incoherencies, constricting the innovation and 
dynamism  potential  for  companies  that  would  be  limited  or  even  punished  for  being  successful  and 
outdoing  their  competitors  even  trough  fair  competition,  solely  because  they  could  became  “market 
dominant”.  Ultimately,  this  situation  would  turn  into  a  vicious  cycle  leading  to  disincentive  to  invest, 
therefore  leading  to  less  innovation  and  competition,  with  the  spill-over  effects  to  smaller  and  new-
coming enterprises, resulting in far worst conditions for consumers. 

3.3 Fundamental and Constitutional Rights 

Throughout  the  presentation  of  the  previous  points  one  was  already  able  to  showcase  some 
circumstances concerning the introduction of this “New Competition Tool” and its relationship with some 
fundamental protected rights. In this regard, we can talk about an inherent risk of deviation from legal 
standards entrenched in European Law and the European Court of Justice. 
Firstly, as already referred to, the extensive empowerment of the Commission to impose structural and 
behavioral remedies, particularly without the need to establish an infringement, is a disproportionate 
measure that interferes with the free market economy and private property. This, combined with a lack 
of details concerning the “when’s and how’s” of its intervention, results in a discretionary and uncertain 
procedure. It is a departure from the evidence-based approach to competition law that  is applicable 
today, which is subject to clear standards and judicial review.  

Therefore, in this regard, it must be also stressed the insufficiency of guidelines that indicates (a much 
needed)  rigorous  procedural  safeguard(s),  ensuring  that  the  concerns  brought  by  the  Commission 
(even  without  an  indication  of  an  infringement)  are  thoroughly  and  methodically  investigated  when 
determining a remedy. On the other hand, the interests of stakeholders must be accounted for. They 
should have rights to defense and independent judicial reviews, which requires a case-by-case analysis, 
ensuring high-quality decision making (like nowadays). In this sense, the Commission should be careful 
concerning the violation of Article 47 of the EU Charter of Fundamental Rights that predicts a “right to 
an effective remedy and to a fair trial”. Also, the Commission should very attentive in regard to Article 
48 CFR, especially when imposing a remedy without finding any infringement. There seems to be an 
incoherency  between  this  type  situation  and  the  presumption  of  innocence  of  the  enterprises  as 
provided in the European Convention of Human Rights, that is yet to be justified. 

More particularly, if one analyses the unbundling procedures, they will come to the conclusion that these 
processes  eliminate  productivity  and  capability  of  prosperous  enterprises  and  diminishes  the 
willingness to invest. In current times, there is yet to appear convincing evidences that these adverse 
circumstances are counterbalanced by consequential improvement in competitive conditions. Like the 
similar cases where this used to happen in the US, there  is  a tendency to abandon the  intention  of 
splitting companies regardless of their conduct as a measure to eradicate market power. Besides the 
economic  impacts,  it  is  very  important  to  highlight  that  if  such  powers  are  given  to  the  Commission 
(unbundling without a previous justified reason) we can be standing on, as indicated by the ECJ, an 
infringement  of  the  fundamental  right  of  freedom  of  property  recognised  under  Article  6/3  TEU  and 
Article 17 CFR, where the sole establishment of a competence for property intervention is considered 
an interposition in fundamental rights. Concerning this aspect, it should be pointed out that an imposed 
transfer  of  assets,  specifically  by  unbundling  would  constitute  an  expropriation  that  requires,  for 
proportionality and fairness reasons, a damage (compensation) claim, something the Commission is 
not intending on doing as demonstrated by the NCT IIA. 

34 

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
As stated above, this wide and discretionary empowerment of the Commission is prone to conflict to 
the “right to do business” under Art. 16 CFR. In fact, through its mission of regulating and impeding a 
distortion of competition by enforcing behavioral and structural measures without the need to find an 
infringement  and  without  any  coherent  formalisation  of  the  set  of  circumstances  that  fall  within  its 
powers, it has opened the susceptibility for the Commission to (politically) intervene, changing business 
models and proceeding to restructure markets. We would be able to see a lot of ordinary situations in 
the traditional model become subject to interventions of the Commission, being virtually impossible to 
differentiate  the  good  and  the  bad  practices  in  the  Commission’s  view,  implying  directly  with  this 
fundamental right that would stunt companies’ growth and innovation, alongside other economical stand 
points. 

3.4 Legal Basis 

The Commission submits, according to the proposals embedded in the New Competition Tool Inception 
Impact  Assessment,  that  the  legal  basis  for  this  new  tool  should  be  based  on  Article  103  TFEU 
conjugated with Article 114 TFEU. 

First  and  foremost,  we  must  acknowledge  that  the  ECJ  have  been  consistently  considering  that  the 
appropriate legal basis is a matter of constitutional implication. In fact, it ensures conformity with the 
principle instituted in Article 5 TEU and limits the scope of the EU competence. Nevertheless, neither 
of these articles seems to be an adequate legal basis: the scope of Article 103 TFEU is to enable the 
adoption of legislation to “give effect to the principles set out in Articles 101 and 102”  – its aim is to 
provide the application of these provisions, but not to alter or complement them. In contrast, the NCT 
seeks to create a new instrument to be applied where an infringement has not even occurred or where 
a dominant position does not exist, which makes it very dubious if any of the Options presented by the 
Commission seeking to remedy the identified structural problems could be based on Article 103 TFEU. 
On the other hand, when it comes to Article 14 TFEU two conditions have to be considered:  on one 
side, the fact that a lot of Member States are in a legislative process to produce new competition laws 
aiming at an adaptation to a digitalised economy, On the other side because the scope of Article 114 
TFEU, regarding it being an appropriate legal basis for approximation measures, is settled on the fact 
that it removes or prevents distortions of competition by developing conditions of the functioning of the 
internal market. Now, if one looks at the aim of the NCT IIA, it is not based on eliminating distortions of 
competition, but rather eliminating structural risks that cannot (allegedly) at least efficiently be tackled 
by the existing regulatory framework for competition law. 

35 

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
