Ref. Ares(2020)4722592 - 09/09/2020

Summary of DT Answer to DG Comp consultation on a Potential NCT 

Deutsche Telekom welcomes the opportunity to comment on the Commissions initiatives to make its rules 
fit for the digitized and globalized economy, consisting of the 3 pillars: 

(1) continued vigorous enforcement of the existing competition rules  
(2) possible ex-ante regulation of digital platforms 
(3) possible new competition tool (NCT) 

In  our  opinion  the  first  two  pillars  are  necessary  and  effective  means  to  address  the  identified  gaps 
regarding structural competition problems of gatekeepers and tipping markets. As regards a potential NCT, 
the  starting  point  of  the  consultation  has  a  similar  objective  aimed  at  tackling  gaps  deriving  from  the 
characteristics of new, digital, platform based, data driven markets. However, the NCT options being put 
forward risk going beyond this scope by extending the application beyond digital gatekeepers. Rather than 
focusing  on  the  core  of  the  problem,  a  wider  application  to  basically  all  digitally  enabled  industries  is 
envisaged. This would create an additional regulatory framework with unclear procedural safeguards.  

We believe that the focus should rather be on advancing the existing competition law framework to tackle 
the general structural issues addressed in this consultation. On the substantial side this should entail: 

improving the process of market definition and reanalysing its role in digital markets  
finding new measures/thresholds for assessment of market power of gatekeepers in digital markets  

- 
- 
-  adapting the theories of harm and respective remedies the ensure contestability 
-  more dynamic approach in merger control and reverse burden of proof for killer acquisitions 

On the procedural side the dynamics of the digital markets call for a better use of interim measures and a 
pre-defined timeline for antitrust investigations. 

The  adaption  of  the  existing  competition  tools  and  their  application  as  well  as  a  new  targeted  ex  ante 
regulation under the DSA framework limited to systemic platforms appears to us as a sufficient means to 
tackle the most severe competition issues that currently may not be effectively covered by competition law 
and other legal provisions.  

A new competition tool also raises two additional challenges:  
If the tool is designed along the lines of the CMA’s Market Investigation Instrument it would have to coincide 
with  a  change  to  the  EU  competition  institutional  structure.  The  UK  tool  builds  on  strong  governance 
provisions with numerous checks and balances, for example a clear split between the decision for a market 
for investigation taken by the CMA Board, and on the other hand the final decision that is taken by an 
external panel of independent experts who are not CMA staff. Beyond that the UK system includes a highly 
transparent process and allows for a fast and effective judicial redress. 

Should the European Commission aim at additionally introducing a new competition law tool, it needs to 
be carefully defined under the principle of proportionality to tackle only the identified enforcement gaps 
and avoid inconsistencies with the ex ante regulatory instrument to be implemented as part of the DSA 
package  and  with  other  regulation  such  as  applicable  to  Electronic  Communication  Networks  and 
Services. In any case it would need to be equipped with the necessary safeguards. For one the threshold 
for using such a pervasive tool should be high, meaning that it should only be applicable in situations where 
competition problems arise on a Europe-wide level and are of a certain magnitude. Beyond that it should 
be a means of last resort and therefore only used in situations where other options such as the traditional 
competition law investigation are not effective.  

September 8, 2020 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
