Manifesto for 
fair digitalisation 
opportunities

Broad coalition calls upon EU decision makers to put 
forward legislation by 2020 ensuring a genuine digital 
level-playing field for remote access to in-vehicle data 

Competition, innovation and consumer interests must 
be at the heart of the EU Digital Single Market

k
c
o
t
s
r
e
t
t
u
h
S
©

 
 
Building on the previous Manifesto initiative of 20181, the undersigned coalition of 
automotive sector and mobility services operators, insurers, consumers and SME 
representatives,  reaffirms  its  call  for  a  legislative  solution,  ensuring  effective 
remote access to in-vehicle data and functional resources which will guarantee 
competition,  innovation,  and  free  consumer  choice.  The  ability  to  unleash  the 
innovative and competitive potential of the automotive servicing industry and 
mobility providers for their services ‘around the car’ must be ensured.

WHAT IS THE PROBLEM?

The pace of technological development and the automotive sector’s digitisation is increasing 
exponentially. By 2025, 70% of the vehicle park is forecasted to be connected2, and the under-
signed stakeholders are eager to lead connected and automated mobility to success. 

Many innovative ideas are in the pipeline but cannot be fulfilled (at all, or only partially), due to 
the lack of effective access to in-vehicle-generated data and functions.

With  the  advent  of  the  ‘connected  car’, 
competition now starts in the vehicle whe re 
the data quality and the ability to safely access 
car functionality determines the quality of the 
service. In an increasingly digitised automotive 
sector, the whole automotive value chain must 
have the right to evolve their business models 
and  thus  compete  on  an  equal  footing  with 
vehicle manufacturers to be able to continue 
to offer the competitive services expected by 
their customers.

Examples for digital use cases:

‘Tyres as a service’, ‘green repair’, digital periodic technical 
inspection, predictive alerts that avoid breakdowns, remote 
diagnostics  optimising  roadside  patrol  assistance  and  thus 
consumers journeys, smart leasing and shared mobility ser-
vices,  ‘talking  parts’  communicating  their  health  status  for 
an optimised aftermarket production and distribution chain, 
‘Pay How You Drive’ insurance policies and driver coaching.

k
c
o
t
s
r
e
t
t
u
h
S
©

2

Manifesto for fair digitalisation opportunities 
 
Four key abilities are therefore needed: 

• 

Independent, direct real-time access to time-critical in-vehicle generated data, not monitored  

by the vehicle manufacturer as competitor.

•   Bi-directional communication with the vehicle and its functions, independent from the vehicle  
  manufacturer.

•   The  ability  to  safely,  securely  and  independently  interact  with  the  driver  remotely  using  the  
in-vehicle Human-Machine-Interface (HMI) functions (e.g. via the dashboard or voice commands).

•  The ability to run independent software directly in the connected vehicle using onboard com- 
    putational capabilities to process any dynamically generated data as closely as possible to its    
      source.

This direct and independent interoperable ac-
cess  will  allow  the  development  of  innovative 
digital products and services, which will result 
in true choice for consumers and competitive 
mobility. These principles are supported  today 
by the EU’s Repair and Maintenance legislation 
for the On-Board-Diagnostics (OBD) connector, 
which must be applied for all other communi-
cation channels with the vehicle.

k
c
o
t
s
r
e
t
t
u
h
S
©

However,  it  is  proven  that  none  of  these  four  abilities  would  be  possible  with  the  data  access 
 model  put  forward  by  vehicle  manufacturers,  the  so-called  ‘Extended  Vehicle’(ExVe),  since  it 
intends to channel all communication for remote data access through the vehicle manufactur-
er’s proprietary backend server. Only a limited part of the in-vehicle data and a narrow subset of 
functions based on the business model of the vehicle manufacturer would be available to 3rd party 
service providers. The manufacturers solution is expected to provide access either directly under 
a B2B contract or via a data services platform, a so-called ‘Neutral Server’.

‘ExVe’  does  not  ensure  equal  abilities.  Instead,  it  gives  vehicle  manufacturers  full  control  to 
decide arbitrarily how, when (latencies) and to whom (mainly aggregated and already diagnosed/
processed) data access will be granted. Competing providers are limited to ’duplicated’ services 
based  on  vehicle  manufacturers  repair  methods.  The  role  of  the  vehicle  manufacturer  as  the 
self-appointed ‘gate-keeper’ is also illustrated by the restricted access to in-vehicle data via the 
physical On-Board-Diagnostics (OBD) port, which is already being arbitrarily imposed.

k
c
o
t
s
r
e
t
t
u
h
S
©

3

Manifesto for fair digitalisation opportunities 
 
 
 
 
 
WHAT IS THE SOLUTION?

The key principle should be to provide equal abilities as those available to the vehicle manufac-
turer. As an example, we believe that these abilities are feasible with an ‘in-vehicle interoperable, 
standardised, secure and open-access platform’ (OTP) and its inherent security. It was presented 
in the Commission’s TRL Study Report3  and supported by independent studies (e.g. the Oversee 
report4). Such a telematics system allows independent applications to be safely and securely imple-
mented in the vehicle to optimise in-vehicle data processing, whilst supporting at the same time 
decentralised communication to/from the vehicle with alternative service providers obtaining di-
rect consumer consent. This avoids the obligation to first have to  sign a data transfer contract  
with the vehicle manufacturer (due to the systemic design of the ExVe). This solution is without 
prejudice to the principle of technology neutrality, as the functional requirements are defined, but 
the technical implementation remains at the discretion of the implementing party.

Such a solution would:

•  Put consumers in full control to decide which service providers can access their data, without  

interference from vehicle manufacturers.

•   Safeguard effective competition and non-monitoring of independent competing businesses by  

vehicle manufacturers.

•   Enable innovative solutions & new business models.

•  Further support, and be fully compatible with cybersecurity. 

• 

Improve road safety and contribute to a more sustainable and circular economy.

•  Guarantee compliance with data protection rules, and this through a direct relationship between  

the service provider and the client.

The interoperable platform ensures at least the same high level of safety, security, liability 
and data protection as the vehicle manufacturers use themselves, whilst safeguarding true 
consumer choice, competition, innovation and road safety.

In  fact,  vehicle  manufacturers  increasingly  allow  selected  (non  competing)  3rd  party  business 
partners to operate their own (3rd party) systems and applications in their vehicles today. This 
demonstrates at the very least that safe and secure direct access is possible without interfering 
with the vehicle’s functions.

TIME TO ACT!

In two recent Resolutions5, the European Parliament called on the Commission to take (legislative) 
action to ensure “fair, secure, real-time and technology-neutral access to in-vehicle data for some 
third  party  entities”.  Additionally,  a  number  of  internal  and  external  studies  of  the  European 
Commission6 provided further evidence of the legal and economic impact of the vehicle data access 
models  in  debate.  In  markets  of  unbalanced  power  with  one  party,  the  vehicle  manufacturers, 
enjoying monopolistic control of access to the vehicle’s data/functions, legislation is needed to 
ensure a level playing field.

The  economic  consequences  of  unregulated  access  to  in-vehicle  data  via  car  manufacturers’ 
current  closed  ‘ExVe’  model  could  lead  to  additional  costs  on  the  independent  aftermarket  in 
Europe. Recent FIA Region I study quantified the costs and losses to €65 billion for consumers 
and independent operators by 20307. It is therefore clearly time to act!

4

Manifesto for fair digitalisation opportunities 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
WHAT DO WE CALL FOR?  
A LEGISLATIVE PROPOSAL BY 2020!

We call on policymakers, and in the first place on the Commission, to present 
a  legislative  proposal  by  2020  that  would  build  on  the  following  ‘High-
level  Principles  and  Requirements’,  leading  to  an  interoperable,  in-vehicle 
telematics platform and its interfaces providing:

1.

2.

3.

4.

5.

Equal  abilities  for  all  automotive  service  providers  to  use  bi-directional  communication 
via the in-vehicle display and/or HMI functions to effectively offer a service to the vehicle 
owner/driver  for  subsequent  selection  and  authorisation,  whilst  respecting  all  legal  re-
quirements (e.g. GDPR compliance, avoidance of driver distraction).

Direct, independent, unmonitored and real-time access to the vehicle, its data and resources, 
for example through an in-vehicle interoperable, standardised, secure and open-access plat-
form, providing bi-directional communication independent from the vehicle manufacturer.

Ability to install independent business models (applications) in the vehicle for optimised 
data processing and innovation.

The  scope  and  quality  of  the  data/functionalities  shall  be  at  least  the  same  as  those  
available to vehicle manufacturers i.e. what the vehicle supports, even if the manufacturers 
do not use it for their own business models. This scope and quality shall be published for 
each vehicle.

A  harmonised  neutral  framework  to  provide  a  single  point  of  access  to  cybersecurity 
certificates, supported by legislative requirements for both this access and for the use 
of the certificates.

Only  by  delivering  on  all  these  functional  ability  requirements  can  the 
EU ensure a competitive services environment and become the leader in 
connected and autonomous mobility, whilst at the same time safeguarding 
its SME-friendly, social and green market economy.

Brussels, October 2019

1The first Manifesto for fair digitalisation opportunities being signed in 2018
2Roland Berger in ETRMA/Quantalyse Report ‘Connected & Automated Mobility–Tyre Industry 
 Use Cases That Require Direct Access to In-Vehicle Data’, June 2019
3Transport Research Laboratory (TRL) study on ‘Access to In-vehicle Data and Resources’, August 2017
4Oversee Report on ‘Open Vehicular Secure Platform’, 7th Framework Programme for Research and Technological Development, November 2013
5European Parliament Resolution on a European strategy on Cooperative Intelligent Transport System (C-ITS) from 13 March 2018, 
 European Parliament Resolution on Autonomous driving in European transport from 5 December 2018
6Joint Research Center (JRC) Study on ‘Access to digital car data and competition in aftersales services’, September 2018; TRL Study 
 (see footnote 4); Valdani, Vicari & Associati (VVA) Study on ‘Cooperative, Connected and Automated Mobility (CCAM), August 2018
7Quantalyse / Schönenberger Advisory Services Study for FIA Region I ‘The automotive digital transformation and the economic impacts 
 of existing data access models’, March 2019

5

Manifesto for fair digitalisation opportunitiesUNDERSIGNED INDUSTRY, CONSUMER AND SME ASSOCIATIONS:

ADPA represents the 
European independent 
automotive data publishers.
www.adpa.eu

CECRA represents the 
European motor trade 
and repair businesses.
www.cecra.eu

CITA represents the 
organisations inspecting 
or supervising inspection 
of in-service motor 
vehicles and their trailers.
www.citainsp.org

EGEA represents the 
European garage and test 
equipment manufacturers 
and importers.
www.egea-association.eu

ETRMA represents the 
European tyre and rubber 
goods producers.
www.etrma.org

FIA Region I represents 
the European motoring 
and touring clubs.
www.fiaregion1.com

FIGIEFA represents 
the European independent 
automotive aftermarket 
distributors.
www.figiefa.eu

Insurance Europe 
represents the European 
insurance and reinsurance 
sector.
www.insuranceeurope.eu

Leaseurope represents 
the European leasing 
and automotive rental 
industries.
www.leaseurope.org

SMEunited represents 
the European crafts, 
trades and SMEs.
www.smeunited.eu

Pierre Thibaudat 
EU Affairs Manager 
pierre.thibaudat@adpa.eu 
+32 2 761 95 18

Bernard Lycke
Director General
bernard.lycke@cecra.eu
+32 2 771 96 56

Eduard Fernandez
Executive Director
e.fernandez@citainsp.org
+32 2 469 06 70

Massimo Brunamonti 
Board Member 
contact@aam-con.com 
+32 2 761 95 15

Fazilet Cinaralp
Secretary General
f.cinaralp@etrma.org
+32 2 218 49 40

Chris Carroll
Policy Director
ccarroll@fia.com
+32 2 282 08 18

Sylvia Gotzen
Chief Executive Officer
sylvia.gotzen@figiefa.eu
+32 2 761 95 10

Thomas Gelin
Policy Advisor
gelin@insuranceeurope.eu
+32 2 894 30 48

Richard Knubben
Deputy Director-General
r.knubben@leaseurope.com
+32 2 778 05 68

Véronique Willems
Secretary General
v.willems@smeunited.eu
+32 2 230 75 99

UEIL represents 
the European 
lubricants industry.
www.ueil.org

Jos Jong
Board Member
josjong@planet.nl
+31 703 38 46 65

6

Manifesto for fair digitalisation opportunities