Ref. Ares(2020)4671156 - 08/09/2020

NON-CONFIDENTIAL VERSION  

European Commission 
The Directorate-General for Competition (DG COMP) 
COMP-NEW-COMPETITION-TOOL@ec.europa.eu 

SUBMISSION SINGLE MARKET – NEW COMPLEMENTARY TOOL TO STRENGTHEN 
COMPETITION BY EMISA  
DATE: 07 September 2020 

I. 

EMISA & MEMBERS 

EMISA  is  a  non-profit  organization,  established  in  2007,  which  represents  the  interests  of 
independent  manufacturers,  suppliers,  and  service  providers  operating  in  the  marine  diesel 
engine and related equipment markets.  

EMISA aims to give independent operators a voice, in order to achieve fair competition and a 
level playing field in the marine diesel engine and related equipment markets. In the past, policy 
makers  tended  to  refer  (regulatory)  debates  to  (large)  Original  Equipment  Manufacturers 
(OEMs), considering them as representatives of the market in which they operate. However, 
these  OEMs  are  obviously  no  neutral  experts.  They  are  market  players  with  their  own 
commercial interests. In these debates, the many (smaller) independent parties were often not 
represented, which nowadays still results in rules and regulations that - implicitly - support and 
favour the position of OEMs.  

EMISA represents approximately 80-90 members, mainly established in Europe but also in the 
Asia-Pacific (APAC) region and the Americas. Many members of EMISA are SMEs. Their business 
model largely depends on excellent customer relations, high levels of quality and service, and 
added value based on (technical) knowledge, flexibility, and innovation.  

II. 

EU DATA STRATEGY & MARINE TRANSPORT & MARINE DIESEL ENGINES 

It is hard to overestimate the importance of marine transport for the general economy in the 
EU. Approximately 90% of worldwide trade is carried by ship. The efficiency and reliability of this 
service affect all consumers in terms of costs, and reliable delivery times as well as in terms of 
the environmental impact. Marine diesel engines are used both for marine propulsion as well as 
for electrical power generation.  

The total annual market turnover of the marine diesel engine aftermarket is at least $3.0 billion 
per annum. Due to the long lifetime (up to approximately 40 years) of marine diesel engines 
(and the ship), the costs for repair and maintenance (R&M) services and spare parts have the 
greatest influence on the overall costs for the shipowner/end-user. Price is a decisive factor, but 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
also quality, safety, and availability of the R&M services and spare parts are essential factors for 
shipowners/end-users.  

NON-CONFIDENTIAL VERSION  

The spare parts for one engine model are - in principle - not interchangeable with another engine 
model with  the  result that  the  spare  parts  aftermarket  and the  repair  and maintenance  and 
overhaul services for each engine model are  separate. Under these circumstances,  there  is a 
severe threat that shipowners get locked-in within the brand-specific systems created by each 
engine-builder. This has been an issue for decennia, but digitalisation, enables engine builders 
to  lock-in  end-users  completely.  This  is  fundamentally  threatening  the  very  existence  of  the 
independent aftermarket.  

In our opinion,  shipowners/end-users should be in control and should be able to choose the 
R&M service and the spare parts they desire for their engine. In that context, it is essential that 
effective  competition  exists  on  the  aftermarkets  between  OEMs  (engine  builders)  and 
Independent operators. Of course, an actual choice is only possible if a genuine alternative offer 
is  available  on  the  market.  Therefore,  independent  operators  should  be  able  to  explore  a 
sustainable  business  model  (in  a  competitive  environment)  which  can  remain  completely 
independent from the business model of engine builders.  

Thus,  in  respect  to  end-user  welfare,  independent  suppliers  and  service  providers  form  an 
essential element in ensuring that:  

o  prices for spare parts and services are kept under competitive pressure; 
o  alternative spares and service are available (no-one stocks all items all the time 

o 

/ has engineers available all the time); 
Innovative  ideas  and  developments  are  not  stifled  by  vested  interests  and 
remain  competitive  (e.g.  regarding  the  development  of  sustainable  and 
environmentally friendly solutions).  

Furthermore,  due  to  digitalization  and  the  rapidly  increasing  importance  of  the  Internet  of 
Things (IoT) OEMs are becoming gatekeepers - technically as well as commercially - to enable 
access to their brand-/model-/type-specific aftermarket. Through digital means, an engine can 
be foreclosed easily. Some examples are:  

access only with secret OEM-passwords;  

- 
-  no access to data deriving from sensors in the engine (machine-generated data);  
-  no interoperability with software in the brand-specific engine enabled;  
-  delay in updates of software;  
-  no  ability  to  create  and  develop  independent  software  that  enables  independent 
diagnostics about the status of the engine and develop the best service at the lowest 
costs (hampering innovation),  

-  no interoperability that enables the creation of independent (innovative) software to 

run in the engine (e.g. to reduce emissions), etcetera.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NON-CONFIDENTIAL VERSION  

III. 

CONCLUSION 

With  digital  foreclosure,  no  independent  offers  are  possible  on  the  marine  diesel  engine 
aftermarkets,  which  means  that  independent  market  players  will  disappear.  OEMs  have  no 
incentive  to  create  interoperability  in  the  designs  of  their  engines,  unless  forced  to  do  so. 
Shipyards who buy the engines are not the shipowners and are not confronted with the high 
costs for repair and maintenance. 

Independent operators need access to data, need to be able to run independent software in a 
safe and secure way, in interaction with the engine/the ship and the crew/shipowner. This is 
essential  to  enable  independent  operators  to  make  a  genuine  independent  offer  to  their 
customers.  

Moreover,  it  is  essential  for  end-users  (shipowners)  to  enable  choice  between  genuine 
alternative offers for repair and maintenance during the long life-time of the engines in their 
ships.  In  the  interests  of  end-user  welfare  (shipowners  and  ultimately  consumers)  effective 
independent competition needs to be enabled through the European Strategy for data.  

Should you have any questions in this respect, please contact EMISA. 

Mered de Vries 
Managing Director EMISA 
M: +31 6 549 058 59 
E: m.devries@emisa.eu  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
