8 September 2020 

ABOUT IFPI 

IFPI represents the interests of the recording industry worldwide. We have some 1,300 
members around the world and in all major European markets, ranging from small-to-
medium enterprise (SME) to global labels. We work to promote the value of recorded 
music, to campaign for the rights of record producers and to expand the commercial 
uses of recorded music in all markets where our members operate. 

The digital music industry 

Over the last two decades, the recorded music industry has dramatically transformed 
itself from an almost entirely physical distribution model (via Compact Discs and vinyl) 
into a multi-faceted digital industry.  

Reflecting the industry’s progressive approach to embracing innovative methods of 
providing access to recorded music online, record companies have licensed hundreds 
of digital music services with more than 60 million tracks1. By 2019, more than 57% of 
recording industry revenues came from digital uses of recordings, with some 42% from 
subscription streaming, which is driving a return to growth for the industry.  

Of  course,  physical  distribution  remains  an  important  and  substantial  part  of  the 
recorded  music  market.  So  too  are  performance  rights  (broadcast  and  public 
performance), which continue to contribute substantially to the overall revenue mix.  

But today’s  recorded  music  market  is  largely  and  increasingly  digital.  That provides 
several important advantages. For example, there are few barriers to entry for new 
companies. Companies of all sizes have access to global sales channels. As a result, 
consumers have more choices than ever before, enjoying easy and affordable access 
to  60  million  licensed  tracks  on  music  streaming  services,  while  also  being  able  to 
enjoy music in other digital and physical formats. 

1 https://investors.spotify.com/financials/press-release-details/2020/Spotify-Technology-S.A.-
Announces-Financial-Results-for-Second-Quarter-2020/default.aspx, 
https://www.apple.com/uk/apple-music/, 
https://www.amazon.com/music/unlimited/ref=as_li_ss_tl. 

1 

 
 
 
 
 
The changing revenue mix, and the central importance of  subscription streaming is 
shown in the recording industry revenues from 2000-2019: 

But it is not solely the distribution of recorded music that has evolved. The marketing 
opportunities  for  recording  artists  have  also  diversified  enormously.  For  example, 
artists can now choose to go direct-to-market by producing their own recordings and 
making  them  available  on  the  digital  music  platforms  of  their  choice  or  they  can 
partner  with  a  number  of  service  providers  who    have  begun  to  offer  their  own 
packages, from digital distribution to marketing and more.  

In addition, record companies have expanded and diversified the services they offer 
to artists, from distribution-only deals to full service partnerships whereby the record 

2 

 
 
 
 
 
company supports all aspects of an artists’ career including distribution, marketing, 
promotion,  touring  and  other  areas.  The  diversity  in  routes  to  market  means  that 
artists have a vast array of choices in how to get their music to their fans and record 
companies face stiff competition to partner with them. 

However,  record  companies  remain  the  primary  investors  in  artists  and  repertoire 
(A&R),  supporting  artists’  career  development,  marketing  and  more  to  help  them 
achieve creative and commercial success. Each year, record companies spend about 
USD 5.8 billion in A&R and marketing combined (USD 4.1 billion going to A&R and USD 
1.7  billion  to  marketing)  to  support  their  artists  –  more  than  one-third  of  the 
companies’  revenues.  Furthermore,  record  companies  invest  more  than  financial 
resources, but also human and industry resources. A record company offers the artist 
access to its network of other music professionals, to its expertise in music production, 
marketing, promotion and distribution services and numerous other services.   

The elements of a thriving competitive digital music market 

A thriving digital music market therefore embodies robust and fair competition at all 
levels in the value chain. In this short paper, we distinguish between music production 
(the process leading up to and including the production of sound recordings) and the 
ultimate distribution of those recordings (the point at which the consumer has access 
to recorded music). 

Observations in response to the Commission’s consultation 

The Commission is now considering the adequacy of existing competition rules in the 
digital marketplace to determine whether these rules need to be adjusted.  

Music production  
The market today is intensely competitive. Thousands of record companies compete 
with each other and with service providers to attract artists by offering them a vast 
range of services that cater to their unique needs. Artists may choose not to partner 
with a record company nor to engage any other service, instead going direct to market 
themselves.  

Digital technology has enabled new ways to produce and distribute music, which has 
further intensified competition on the production side (upstream level). Furthermore, 

3 

 
 
 
 
technology has not created potential gatekeepers in this space; on the contrary, it has 
helped to diversify production.  

The  existing  competition  rules  and  applicable  thresholds  for  applying  those  rules 
remain valid. We are not aware of any new factors affecting competition which would 
require a re-assessment of the adequacy of those rules. As illustrated above, the music 
production market is vibrantly diverse, with easy market access for record companies, 
artist  service  companies  and  artists  alike.  The  new  competition  tools  currently 
contemplated  by  the  Commission,  if  applied  generally  rather  than  in  a  targeted 
manner to digital services with strategic market power, would raise concerns as they 
would create legal uncertainty, which in turn is likely to hinder innovation. 

Music distribution  

The  distribution  of  music  has  moved  predominantly  online  and  consequently  the 
factors affecting competition have evolved.  

A  dynamic  and  competitive  marketplace  among  the  online  content  distributors  is 
important for IFPI’s member record companies that license digital music platforms to 
make their recordings available to the public.  

One of the new factors that may require attention, and which is also already identified 
by the Commission, is control of data (such as that collected and kept by the large 
content sharing platforms, including social media platforms) as a relevant factor to be 
taken  into  account when  considering  a  service provider’s positioning  in  the  market 
from a competition law perspective.   

As a digital industry, we are interested in the work undertaken by the Commission to 
explore  competition  in  digital  markets,  and  we  would  welcome  the  opportunity  to 
contribute  further  to  this  project.  Our  industry  supports  and  depends  upon  strong 
competition, which is already underpinned by the existing regulatory framework. We 
agree that any adjustments to this framework must be based upon clear evidence-
based policy, and we look forward to the findings of the present consultation, after 
which we hope the Commission will be in a position to more clearly demarcate any 
areas that it considers require further consideration. 

4 

 
 
 
 
 
