DANISH CHAMBER OF COMMERCE 
Børsen 
DK-1217 København K 

www.danskerhverv.dk 
info@danskerhverv.dk 
T. + 45 3374 6000  

European Commission 
DG COMP A.1 

Upload via better regulation website 

8 September 2020 

The Danish Chamber of Commerce contribution to the European Com-
mission’s Public Consultation on the initiative: “New Competition Tool 
(‘NCT’)” 

The Danish Chamber of Commerce welcomes the opportunity to provide input to the public con-
sultation on the Commissions initiative: “New Competition Tool (‘NCT’)”. 

General remarks 
With this new initiative, the Commission seeks to explore the need for a possible new competition 
tool (“NCT”), that will allow the Commission to address structural competition problems pre-
sent within the Single Market, in a timely and effective manner. For this purpose, the Commission 
is asking for input on (i) whether there is a need for a new competition tool to ensure fair and 
competitive markets, and (ii) the characteristics that such a new competition tool should have. 

The Danish Chamber of Commerce supports the Commission’s objective of ensuring fair, un-
distorted and contestable markets and acknowledge the Commissions concern regarding the ex-
istence of such structural competition problems. Furthermore, the Danish Chamber of Commerce 
fully agrees with the Commission’s statement that ensuring such fair, undistorted and contestabil-
ity markets require a holistic approach, and that a vigorous enforcement of the existing competi-
tion rules is a very import part of this approach.  

The Danish Chamber of Commerce is however not convinced that a holistic approach requires the 
introduction of two new initiatives, e.g. ex-ante regulation of digital platforms and a new competi-
tion tool. Additionally, we are very critical of the four policy options reflected in both the Commis-
sions Initial Impact Assessment (“IIA”) and this public consultation on a New Competition Tool 
(“Consultation”), as they are very extensive and neither sufficiently described nor justified.  

It is the general position of the Danish Chamber of Commerce, that new legislation – to the fur-
thest extent possible – should be general in nature, so that it may be applicable regardless of in-
dustry, sector, technology or business-model.   

Legislation targeting general issues, but aimed only at specific industries, sectors, technologies or 
business-models risk becoming obsolete or dated very quickly, thereby creating unintended loop-
holes and barriers, fragmentation of the Single Market, and a stifling of innovation and develop-
ment. The focus must be on creating a level playing field.  

tbj@danskerhverv.dk 
TBJ 

Page 1/5 

 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
DANISH CHAMBER OF COMMERCE 

In those very limited situations where specific regulation aimed at larger companies are called for, 
the regulation must be limited to addressing discrepancies and issues which prevents the Single 
Market from performing effectively. 

While the Commission does make a clear statement of respecting the fundamental rights of Euro-
pean companies, specifically mentioning the companies right to defence and the right to judicial 
review, which we consider very positive, the Commission fails to address the issue that with the 
proposed NCT, European companies will be left in a situation where they will not know what rules 
apply, or what to stay away from in order to avoid being subject to NCT remedies. 

Companies spend a lot of time and resources developing their business strategy and marketing 
plans and coming up with innovative new ideas, with the hope and aim, of creating a successful 
business. We fear that the proposed NCT whereby European companies, which do not violate or 
intent to violate the existing competition rules, will lead to a situation where European companies 
may not have the same drive to further develop their businesses, as the successful development of 
a company in a given market, may lead to the Commissions finding of either a structural risk for 
or structural lack of competition in the specific  market. As such, we fear that the proposed NCT 
may result in a situation where European companies fall victim to their own success. 

This concern is primarily due to the fact, that neither the IIA or the Consultation adequately de-
scribe the structural competition problems identified by the Commission, which cannot be ad-
dressed – or addressed effectively – by existing competition rules.  

Simply mentioning monopolization strategies by non-dominant companies with market power as 
an example of a structural competition problem that the Commission cannot address using the 
existing competition rules, and parallel leveraging strategies by dominant companies into multi-
ple adjacent markets as an example of problems which cannot be addressed in the most effective 
manner, is in our opinion not sufficient to describe the need or justification for the proposed NCT. 
We therefore request the Commission to elaborate on these issues in the upcoming Impact As-
sessment (“IA”).  

It is the position of the Danish Chamber of Commerce, that Article 101 TFEU and Article 102 
TFEU already provide a solid foundation for European competition law and are sufficiently flexi-
ble to address the changing markets. It is our understanding that it is the long-standing position 
of the Commission, that market developments should be addressed in the block exemptions and 
the accompanying guidelines. This is a position which we do not believe should be changed. 

Specific remarks 

Re. structural competition problems 
The Consultation makes references to certain structural competition problems which the Com-
mission has identified as part of its experience with enforcing the EU competition rules. These are 
described to be problems which the current competition rules cannot tackle or cannot address in 

2/5 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DANISH CHAMBER OF COMMERCE 

the most effective manner and are categorized as either “structural risks for competition” or “a 
structural lack of competition”.  

However, neither of these types of structural competition problems are described in any greater 
detail in the Consultation. As such, there is no description of what these structural competition 
problems consist of, if there are specific sectors or situations in which these problems are more 
likely to occur, or why the existing competition rules are not enough to address these problems. 

While the Danish Chamber of Commerce shares the Commission concern that a lack of competi-
tion can lead to higher prices, lower quality, less choice and innovation, we are not convinced that 
the proposed NCT is appropriate or necessary to address the identified structural competition 
problems. 

The Danish Chamber of Commerce further questions whether the possibility of conducting sector 
inquiries – together with existing competition rules – does not already give the Commission 
enough tools to investigate and address problems arising in specific sectors. 

Furthermore, the Danish Chamber of Commerce requests that the upcoming IA contains a de-
scription of the new definitions which the Commissions is using in the IIA and Questionnaire, but 
which has not previously been defined. One example is the definition of the term “gatekeeper” in 
section 18 of the Consultation.  

Re. assessment of policy options 
Understanding that the proposed NCT is intended to be used in conjunction or addition to the ex-
isting competition rules addressing anti-competitive agreements and concerted practices between 
companies in Article 101 TFEU and abuse by a company of a dominant position in Article 102 
TFEU, the proposed NCT should have the same general character, flexibility and scope.  

Additionally, it is the position of the Danish Chamber of Commerce, that Article 101 TFEU and 
Article 102 TFEU already provide a solid foundation for European competition law and are suffi-
ciently flexible to address the changing markets. It is our understanding that it is the long-stand-
ing position of the Commission, that market developments should be addressed in the block ex-
emptions and the accompanying guidelines. This is a position which we do not believe should be 
changed. 

As regards the authority which the proposed NCT will grant the Commission, e.g. the power to 
impose especially structural changes on private companies, the Danish Chamber of Commerce 
has always been opposed to the competition authorities being given such extensive, invasive and 
wide-ranging powers, as this is a quantum leap from what is known today. This being even more 
the case considering these measures may be imposed on private companies, which has neither vi-
olated current competition rules nor may be considered an “essential facility”. Consequently, the 
Danish Chamber of Commerce cannot support any initiative whereby the competition authorities 
are being granted such extensive, invasive and wide-ranging powers. 

3/5 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DANISH CHAMBER OF COMMERCE 

It is the opinion of the Danish Chamber of Commerce, that if a NCT is to be introduced, its appli-
cation must be reduced to behavioural precautions and applicable only under very specific and 
narrow conditions, and only after a rigid sector inquiry has documented the existence of such 
structural competition problems. There must be a razor-sharp definition of which type of behav-
iour the Commission will be able to intervene against. 

Acknowledging that sometimes competition issue arises as an unforeseen consequence of another 
EU-legislation, we encourage the Commission to take the appropriate steps to ensure, that the 
competition problems the Commission seeks to address with the proposed NCT is not in fact an 
unforeseen and unintended ripple effect stemming from another EU-legislation. Furthermore, we 
also encourage the Commission to investigate whether the structural competition problems can 
be addressed by adjusting existing EU-rules, rather than introducing a new competition tool.  

Similarly, before any NCT is introduced, the Commission should take special care to ensure that 
such NCT does not undermine the application of existing competition law or sector specific legis-
lation.  

Furthermore, any NCT must pay special notice to avoid being used, interpreted or constructed in 
such a way, that it will de facto protect certain types of industries, sectors, technologies or busi-
ness-models at the expense of others. The application of the proposed NCT should therefore not 
be limited to only digital companies, or companies which can already be classified as dominant 
pursuant to Article 102 TFEU. 

Considering the ongoing review of the existing competition tools, including the horizonal and ver-
tical block exemption regulation and the guidelines, as well as the public consultation on the defi-
nition of the relevant market published by the Commission on 26 June 2020, and while we are 
waiting on the upcoming report on the Commission’s investigation of the existing merger rules, 
the Danish Chamber of Commerce is surprised that the Commission has launched this proposal 
for a NCT at this time.  

The NCT initiative appears even more premature taking into consideration, that neither the IIA 
nor the Consultation address the question of why the structural competition problems cannot be 
addressed through the existing – maybe revised – competition rules.  

The Danish Chamber of Commerce suggests that any further work on a potential NCT should 
await the outcome of the current reviews, as to determine if the existing competition rules – 
maybe post review – may in fact be enough to address the structural competition problems the 
Commission are referring to. 

Re. institutional set-up of a new competition tool 
The Danish Chamber of Commerce considers it imperative, that any new competition tool is sub-
ject to strict oversight and is accompanied by appropriate safeguards, rights of defence and due 
process.  

4/5 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DANISH CHAMBER OF COMMERCE 

While we understand and respect the Commission desire to act quickly against competition prob-
lems within the Internal Market, sometimes even before the competition problem is a problem, 
this must be weighed against the companies justified expectation that if they follow the rules, they 
are free to develop, expand and run their business as they see fit.  

Considering the extensive, invasive and wide-ranging powers the NCT will grant the Commission, 
of imposing behavioural and structural remedies on companies which has in fact not violated or 
breached any currently legislation, it is crucial that the requirements for the Commission investi-
gative process are very strict. 

As a minimum, the Commissions investigative process and showing of market failure must fulfil 
the requirements necessary for imposing sanctions and fines subject to existing competition rules. 
Consequently, the Danish Chamber of Commerce share the Commissions position, as it is stated 
in the Commissions press released, that a rigorous market investigation must be carried out, be-
fore any NCT remedies may be applicable, but would like the Commission to elaborate on this in 
the upcoming IA. 

As far as the Commissioners investigative powers, it is important to adjust these to the situations 
in which the NCT is intended to be used, which is in situations where there is in fact no violation 
of existing competition rules.  

The possibility of using the invasive investigative tools applicable to ordinary competition cases, 
such as possible cases of collusion or misuse of dominance must not be allowed against compa-
nies which are not suspected of any wrongdoing. The possibility of conducting dawn raids should 
for example not be possible, while the possibility of imposing fines may be considered, where the 
companies do not meet certain reasonable deadlines. At the same time, there must be specific 
deadlines within which the Commission must decide whether to make use of the NCT-remedies, 
so that the companies are not left in uncertainty for years. 

The Danish Chamber of Commerce considers it a necessity for the introduction and application of 
the proposed NCT, that the companies’ right to defend themselves are respected both throughout 
the investigative process, but also in connection with any subsequent measures. This includes -
but is not limited to, the right to be heard during the investigation, the right to be heard on the 
proposed measures, as well as the right to judicial review by the European Court. We 
acknowledge the Commissions statement to that fact in the IIA, but would like the Commission to 
elaborate further on this in the upcoming IA. 

Best regards, 

Tina Buur Johnsen 
The Danish Chamber of Commerce 

5/5 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
