Ref. Ares(2020)4722938 - 09/09/2020

ECSA contribution to the European Commission consultation on a  
New Competition Tool 

8 September 2020 

Final  

The  European  Community  Shipowners’  Associations  (ECSA)  is  the  voice  of  the 
European shipping industry. Founded in 1965, ECSA promotes the interests of 20 
member associations of the EU, the U.K. and Norway. ECSA strives for a regulatory 
environment that fosters the international competitiveness of European shipping. 

ECSA  welcomes  the  European  Commission  closely  reflecting  on  how  it  can  best 
ensure that the EU’s competition policy best fits the modern economy.  

Understanding  the  New  Competition  Tool  is  considered  as  a  non-sector  specific 
tool, ECSA would like to underline the following: 

1.  ECSA  warns  against  the  European  Commission  drawing  overarching 
conclusions regarding structural competition problems without a solid basis. 
The shipping industry is a truly global industry. It encompasses a variety of 
segments,  very  different  but  all  characterized  by  a  highly  competitive 
environment.  Overall,  ECSA  is  of  the  opinion  that  the  EU  shipping  sector 
does  not  face  unfair  competition  in  the  internal  market  that  in  principle 
cannot  be  addressed  effectively  or  timely  by  the  current  EU  competition 
toolbox (or other legislative frameworks).1  

2.  Being a global industry with integrated networks where any action is likely 
to  affect  and  implicate  several  jurisdictions’  legal  systems,  the  shipping 
industry needs competition policies that seek to create a global level playing 
field, respect the fine balance in a highly competitive environment and that 
are  sufficiently  coherent,  transparent  and  responsive  to  changing  global 
market conditions, without undue complexity and legal uncertainty.  

1  This  was  only  very  recently  recognised  after  a  lengthy  and  solid  assessment  by  the 
European  Commission  for  one  of  the  shipping  sector’s  segments  when  the  European 
Commission took the decision to extent the Block Exemption Regulation for Liner Consortia 
for another 4 years - Commission Regulation (EU) 2020/436 of 24 March 2020 amending 
Regulation (EC) No 906/2009 as regards its period of application (Text with EEA relevance) 

C/2020/1734 

vzw ECSA asbl, Boulevard du Régent, Regentlaan 43-44, 1000 Brussels, Belgium 
T +32 2 510 61 20   •   mail@ecsa.eu   •   www.ecsa.eu 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
 
3.  In the light of the EU competition policy’s role model for third countries, any 
new competition tool that lacks very clear and stringent criteria on how and 
why  it  will  apply,  risks  to  add  to  regulatory  uncertainty  for  shipping 
companies  acting  at  the  global  level.  Even  more  so  given  the  fact  that 
geopolitical  tensions  have  increased  protectionist  behaviour  by  States, 
including through ‘selective’ interpretations under competition policy.  

4.  Before  the  sector  is  made  subject  to  a  new,  additional  tool,  much  more 
evidence and consultation is needed. In the absence of this being provided 
in  the  current  IA,  the  shipping  industry,  including  related  digital 
products, must remain outside of the scope of any NCT.  
In this context, ECSA underlines: 

o  It is important to ensure that the adoption and/or extension of any 

legislative framework is necessary and proportionate; 

o  An in-depth study of the necessity of the NCT seems to be lacking, 
both having regard to existing legal frameworks and whether there 
are  actual  industry  structural  competition  problems  that  cannot  be 
addressed under the current framework; 

o  Certainty and predictability  in  laws must be guaranteed. There is a 
strong need for clarity on the risk of breaches of rules and appropriate 
checks and balances must be in place, so as to ensure protection of 
the rule of law. The EU competition regime must  continue to stand 
for transparency, predictability and due process. 

ECSA is registered under the EU Transparency nummer : 59004966537-01 

vzw ECSA asbl, Boulevard du Régent, Regentlaan 43-44, 1000 Brussels, Belgium 
T +32 2 510 61 20   •   mail@ecsa.eu   •   www.ecsa.eu 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
