EX ANTE REGULATORY 
INSTRUMENT FOR LARGE ONLINE 
PLATFORMS AND A NEW 
COMPETITION TOOL 

Response of Federation of German Consumer Organisations 
(vzbv) to the public consultation on the “New Competition 
Tool” and the Digital Services Act package “Ex ante 
regulatory instrument for large online platforms with 
significant network effects acting as gatekeepers in the 
European Union’s internal market” 

September 8, 2020 

Impressum 

Verbraucherzentrale 

Bundesverband e.V. 

Team 

Digital and Media

Rudi-Dutschke-Straße 17 

10969 Berlin 

Digitales@vzbv.de

Bundesverband der Verbraucherzentralen und Verbraucherverbände

Verbraucherzentrale Bundesverband e.V.

 
 
 
 
 
 
2 l 14 

Ex Ante Regulatory Instrument for Large Online Platforms and a New Competition Tool

Verbraucherzentrale Bundesverband e.V.

TABLE OF CONTENTS 
I. SUMMARY 

II. INTRODUCTION 

3 

4 

1. Urgency for NCT and Ex Ante Regulation ................................................................. 4 

III. A COMPLEMENTARY POLICY APPROACH FOR EX ANTE REGULATION AND 
NCT 

5 

1.1 Combining the Strength of Case-by-Case and “Blacklist”-based Approaches ......... 6 

IV. DSA EX ANTE REGULATION 

7 

1. Key underlying Principles and Scope of the Ex Ante Regulation ............................... 7 
2. Criteria to identify a Gatekeeper Position .................................................................. 8 
3. Ex Ante Regulation: Lists of Prohibitions/Restrictions and Obligations ..................... 9 
3.1 Prohibited/Restricted Practices ............................................................................... 9 
3.2 Ex Ante Regulation: Targeted Obligations ............................................................ 10 
4. New EU Taskforce: Enforcement of Ex-Ante Regulation and NCT ......................... 10 
4.1 EU Taskforce: Enforcement of Ex-Ante Regulation and NCT ............................... 10 
4.2 Benefits of the EU-level Taskforce Approach ........................................................ 11 

V. THE NEW COMPETITION TOOL 

12 

1. Scope of the New Competition Tool ........................................................................ 12 
1.1 Horizontal Approach more suitable than limited Scope ......................................... 12 
1.2 Market Structure-based Approach more suitable than Dominance-based Approach
 ................................................................................................................................... 12 
1.3 German Competition Law: A Blueprint for the NCT? ............................................. 13 
2. Competences of DG Competition: Enforcement of the NCT ................................... 13 
3. Case-specific Regulatory Interventions ................................................................... 14 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Verbraucherzentrale Bundesverband e.V. 

Ex Ante Regulatory Instrument for Large Online Platforms and a New Competition Tool 

3 l 14

I. SUMMARY 
This paper provides the Federation of German Consumer Organisations’ 
(Verbraucherzentrale Bundesverband - vzbv) feedback to the European Commission’s 
initiative on (1) the “Digital Services Act package: an ex ante regulatory instrument for 
large online platforms with significant network effects acting as gatekeepers in the 
European Union’s Internal Market” (“Ex Ante Regulation”) and (2) a “New Competition 
Tool” (“NCT”).   

The challenges to fair competition and a functioning single market posed particularly by 
large platform players in digital markets require new instruments to complement 
traditional enforcement of competition in order to ensure a functioning single market 
and protect consumers’ interests in an effective and timely manner.  

Both tools, the Ex Ante Regulation and the NCT should be designed to complement 
each other: A combination of a list of prohibitions/restrictions and obligations in the Ex 
Ante Regulation included in the DSA, complemented by a case-by-case assessment 
and remedies in the context of the NCT. 

Digital Services Act (DSA) Ex Ante Regulation 

  vzbv supports the introduction of an asymmetric Ex Ante Regulation for large 
online platforms with significant network effects acting as gatekeepers.  

  The Ex Ante Regulation should be based on a list of prohibitions/restrictions 
and targeted obligations. The comprised list should define comprehensive, 
enforceable prohibitions and obligations for large online platforms acting as 
gatekeepers and it should be regularly reviewed. This list could be 
complemented by case-by-case analysis and remedies/obligations where 
necessary under the NCT or through enforcement of Articles 101 and 102 
TFEU. 

  vzbv supports the creation of a taskforce within the European Commission’s 
Directorate-General for Competition. It should be responsible for enforcement of 
the Ex Ante Regulation (and the NCT) in close cooperation with the sectoral 
competent authorities at EU and Member State level. 

New Competition Tool (NCT)  

  vzbv supports the introduction of the NCT to deal with specific cases of 

structural risk for competition in markets. The NCT should be designed as a 
market structure-based competition tool with a horizontal scope.  

  To ensure effective enforcement of the NCT, the European Commission must 

be vested with appropriate powers to investigate and to impose and enforce 
effective remedies. 

  The NCT should be clearly delimited from competition policy enforcement 

under Articles 101 and 102 TFEU. 

 
 
 
4 l 14 

Ex Ante Regulatory Instrument for Large Online Platforms and a New Competition Tool

Verbraucherzentrale Bundesverband e.V.

II. INTRODUCTION 
The Federation of German Consumer Organisations (Verbraucherzentrale 
Bundesverband - vzbv) welcomes the opportunity to respond to two European 
Commission consultations on (1) the “Digital Services Act package: an ex ante 
regulatory instrument for large online platforms with significant network effects acting as 
gatekeepers in the European Union’s Internal Market” (“Ex Ante Regulation”) and (2) a 
“New Competition Tool” (“NCT”).   

vzbv supports the proposal of the European Commission to introduce an Ex Ante 
Regulation for large online platforms with significant network effects acting as 
gatekeepers as envisaged in the Digital Services Act package. An Ex Ante Regulation 
is a suitable tool to remedy the challenges to social and economic welfare posed by 
large gatekeeper platforms. 

vzbv also supports the proposal of the European Commission to introduce the NCT, 
enabling the Directorate-General for Competition (DG COMP), in close cooperation 
with Member States’ competition authorities, to intervene proactively in digital and non-
digital markets. The envisaged NCT must provide an adequate response against 
structural competition distortions resulting from increasing digitalisation and 
“platformisation” of markets.  

Both tools, the Ex Ante Regulation and the NCT should be introduced and designed to 
complement each other and the existing competition policy enforcement framework. 

1. URGENCY FOR NCT AND EX ANTE REGULATION 

Large gatekeeper platforms increasingly determine how consumer markets function. 
Some markets have become increasingly concentrated with a few large platforms 
acting as gatekeepers for many digital products and services accessed by consumers. 
While digital innovations increased consumer welfare over the past decades, these 
welfare gains become threatened in more recent times through excessive market 
concentration by gatekeepers for many digital products and services – especially if 
gatekeepers act across markets. 

The reasons are underlying market characteristics that support and cement large 
platforms’ market positions: lock-in and network effects, economies of scope and scale, 
as well as information asymmetries. Some online platforms have repeatedly been 
engaged in certain types of conduct (like self-preferencing, tying and bundling) and 
have thus reinforced this trend. This is facilitated as gatekeepers occupy central 
positions in a market or across markets – enabling them to set the rules of the game for 
suppliers and consumers alike, thereby acting in their own commercial interest.  

As a result, it becomes more and more difficult to ensure that digital markets remain fair 
and contestable for innovators, businesses, and new market entrants. This trend 
threatens to undermine the gains in consumer and social welfare that were generated 
by the digitised economy so far. This unfavourable development calls for policy-makers 
to take decisive actions at European level. 

Considering the interplay of technology, data and economic power and the ability of 
platforms to leverage them across markets, the current European competition 
legislation is insufficient to address the challenges posed by gatekeeper platforms.  

Some platform players, acting across markets occupy central positions in markets, 
(or “interfaces” between markets) connecting adjunct markets. This enables them to 

 
 
Verbraucherzentrale Bundesverband e.V. 

Ex Ante Regulatory Instrument for Large Online Platforms and a New Competition Tool 

5 l 14

determine the rules of the game for suppliers and consumers alike, acting in their own 
commercial interest. The control of ecosystems or of “interfaces” also allows non-
dominant players to control suppliers’ access to significant market segments. This 
enables also non-dominant players to set the rules by which supply and demand meet 
in these markets.  

As a result, it becomes more and more difficult for competition authorities to ensure that 
digital markets remain fair and contestable for innovators and new market entrants.  

There is the notion that the effectiveness of remedies in digital market cases solely 
through the enforcement of competition law as it currently stands is too limited. 
Although the enforcement of competition law has sanctioned and imposed remedies in 
individual cases, this has taken many years during which the harm to competition and 
consumers has persisted and sometimes increased. Also, the effectiveness of 
remedies in digital market cases can be doubted. Competition cases and multiple 
international studies1 have identified wide ranging and self-reinforcing harms to 
competition in digital and related markets, hampering the ability of these markets to 
self-correct. Therefore, the European Commission should introduce new measures that 
can help to prevent, rather than belatedly attempt to cure, the resulting harms to 
competition, to the single market and to consumers. 

Considering the interplay of technology, (consumers’) data, economic power and the 
ability of platforms to leverage these across markets, the current European competition 
framework is not sufficient to address the challenges posed by large (multi-market) 
digital players. National policymakers, for example in Germany and France, have 
recognised this and initiated legislative reforms to enable their national competition 
authorities to effectively and proactively intervene in digital markets, e.g. to prevent 
them from “tipping”. The European Commission should follow this approach and use 
the NCT to initiate a corresponding “update” of EU competition rules and introduce the 
Ex Ante Regulation to set general rules for large gatekeeper platforms that help tackle 
market-wide problems. 

III. A COMPLEMENTARY POLICY 
APPROACH FOR EX ANTE REGULATION 
AND NCT 
The European Commission should design the Ex Ante Regulation and the NCT in a 
complementary manner: 

a)  A mix of general prohibitions/restrictions of certain unfair trading practices 
and targeted obligations for large online platforms acting as gatekeepers 
under the proposed Ex Ante Regulation envisaged in the DSA to tackle 
general problems. 

b)  Specific tailor-made remedies for large gatekeeper platforms on a case-by-
case basis under the NCT to tackle structural competition problems. 

___________________________________________________________________________________________ 

1 Including most recently, the in-depth analysis of digital advertising markets by the UK CMA - Online Platforms and 

Digital Advertising Market Study, 1 July 2020, https://www.gov.uk/cma-cases/online-platforms-and-digital-advertising-
market-study#final-report.                                                                                         

 
 
6 l 14 

Ex Ante Regulatory Instrument for Large Online Platforms and a New Competition Tool

Verbraucherzentrale Bundesverband e.V.

Both, the Ex Ante Regulation and the NCT must also be complementary to the  

c)  Existing enforcement of Articles 101 and 102 TFEU of anticompetitive 

conduct. 

The European Commission should complement “traditional” competition policy 
enforcement under Articles 101 and 102 TFEU with the NCT tackling case-specific 
structural problems (outside of the realm of Articles 101 and 102 TFEU) and an Ex Ante 
Regulation with general prohibitions/restrictions of certain practices and targeted 
obligations for large gatekeepers. This triple approach would create a legal and 
enforcement framework capable of addressing the blind spots of the current 
enforcement of competition law and set the conditions for consumer welfare to thrive in 
the digital economy and other markets (see Figure 1 below). 

vzbv emphasises that there should be no friction between the ex-ante rules and the 
NCT and that they should complement each other’s role in ensuring that markets are 
open, competitive and fair. Also, law makers must clearly distinguish between the 
enforcement of Articles 101 and 102 TFEU and the enforcement of the NCT. 

List of prohibited 
practices/restrictions 
and obligations for 
gatekeeper 
platforms to tackle 
general problems 

Case-by-case 
tackling of structural 
competition 
problems (not 
infringement/antico
mpetitive conduct 
under Articles 101 
and 102 TFEU) 

Ex Ante 
Rules (list)  

New 
Competition 
Tool

Enforcement of 
Articles 101 and 
102 TFEU 

Case-by-case 
investigations and 
enforcement of Articles 

Figure 1: Complementary Policy Approach: Ex Ante Regulation, New Competition Tool and enforcement of Articles 101 
and 102 TFEU. 

1.1 Combining the Strength of Case-by-Case and “Blacklist”-based Approaches 

Adopting an enforcement mechanism for individual cases arising from structural 
competition problems (under the NCT) has the advantage of being flexible and enables 
case-specific remedies. However, its downside is that it can take an unacceptably 
long time, while harm to competition and consumers persists. 

The list-based approach in the Ex Ante Regulation of prohibiting or restricting certain 
unfair trading practices in general and imposing targeted obligations on large 
gatekeeper platforms has the advantage of signalling to market participants which 

 
 
 
Verbraucherzentrale Bundesverband e.V. 

Ex Ante Regulatory Instrument for Large Online Platforms and a New Competition Tool 

7 l 14

conduct is deemed illegal, thereby deterring unfair practices. It also facilitates 
monitoring and fast enforcement. Its downside is the challenge to formulate 
prohibitions or restrictions of unfair trading practices and obligations. If the wording of 
the prohibited practices is too specific, they may be too narrowly defined, and platforms 
will be likely to claim successfully that their conduct falls out of the scope of the rule. As 
a result, attempts to take action against these unfair practices will be chronically 
unsuccessful. An EU-wide list-based approach, prohibiting or restricting certain unfair 
trading practices and by large gatekeeper platforms can be introduced relatively 
quickly.  

The combination of both complementary policy approaches will enable the EU 
Commission to realise the desired policy objectives of both initiatives in the most 
effective manner. 

IV. DSA EX ANTE REGULATION 

This section will lay out the desired key principles that should be underlying the Ex Ante 
Regulation, the criteria that could be used to identify gatekeeper positions and 
suggestions for conducts to be included in the lists of prohibited/restricted practices and 
obligations. 

1. KEY UNDERLYING PRINCIPLES AND SCOPE OF THE EX ANTE REGULATION 

The key principles underlying the design of the Ex Ante Regulation should include: 

  EU level approach: The European Commission must avoid fragmentation of 
the single market through inconsistent rules or inconsistent enforcement of the 
Ex Ante Regulation. This is necessary to ensure the effective functioning of the 
digital single market in the interest of innovative businesses and consumers. 
However, enforcement must not necessarily take place at EU level, though 
consistent enforcement of the rules must be achieved. Existing enforcement 
standards at national level should not be weakened. 

  Asymmetric regulation: vzbv supports the introduction of an asymmetric Ex 
Ante Regulation specifically targeting large gatekeeper platforms. The Ex Ante 
Regulation should therefore not apply to other platforms or companies, in order 
not to hamper their ability to compete with the gatekeeper platforms. As a result, 
the Ex Ante Regulation should provide strong incentives for all market 
participants to innovate and offer better products at more attractive conditions to 
consumers. 

  Rules covering all sectors: When implementing The Ex Ante Regulation the 
European Commission should adopt  a regulatory approach based on clear 
obligations for platforms and prohibition or restrictions of unfair conduct. Large 
platforms increasingly act across markets and sectors. As they leverage data as 
well as access to consumers and suppliers across markets, a  general 
”blacklist”- and obligations-based approach seems appropriate as it would cover 
all sectors. Otherwise, there is a risk that gatekeeper platforms’ activities across 
markets will significantly hurt consumers and competitors in sectors not covered 
by the Ex Ante Regulation. These general Ex Ante Regulation could be 

 
 
 
 
 
8 l 14 

Ex Ante Regulatory Instrument for Large Online Platforms and a New Competition Tool

Verbraucherzentrale Bundesverband e.V.

complemented by sector- or issue-specific rules e.g. for advertising, 
operating systems and app-stores.  

  The success of a policy approach based on an obligation/prohibition list 

depends on defining an unambiguous list of types of conduct which are broad 
enough in scope to catch all relevant conduct, but which is sufficiently precise 
to have the desired signalling effect to market participants and enable simple 
monitoring and enforcement. The challenge is to strike a balance between 
specificity and broadness: If the wording of the prohibited practices is too 
specific, they may be too narrowly defined, and platforms will be likely to claim 
successfully that their conduct falls out of the scope of the prohibited practice. 
As a result, attempts to take action against these unfair practices will be 
chronically unsuccessful. An EU-wide list, prohibiting or restricting certain unfair 
trading practices by large gatekeeper platforms can be introduced relatively 
quickly. 

  Data protection (GDPR) principles must be taken into account and enforcers 
must be involved in the establishment of obligations and prohibitions to ensure 
that consumers fundamental rights to privacy and data protection are respected 
at all times in the investigation of the business practices.  

  For legal certainty and to avoid potential forum shopping it will be important to 
ensure clear delimitation and consistency of the concurrently proposed New 
Competition Tool both in scope of application and enforcement.   

2. CRITERIA TO IDENTIFY A GATEKEEPER POSITION 

The criteria should be used to identify a gatekeeper position for particular 
products/services or particular markets (e.g. the gatekeepers’ core and adjacent 
markets). These criteria do not necessarily have to be cumulative in each case. The 
list of criteria must be reviewed regularly in order to ensure that the criteria reflect 
current market realities. 

The following factors seem particularly relevant: 

  Ability to exploit network effects. 

  Ability to build and exploit "economies of scope" by combining various 

resources (e.g. data and access to users from different products/services, 
domains or markets/sectors). 

  Ability to control access and determine conditions for consumers’ access to a 
significant part of a market. (e.g. expressed in the ability to engage in tying 
and bundling of services and/or terms and conditions vis-à-vis consumers or 
business users.) 

  Number of users and market share. 

  Large scale accumulation of data relevant for a competitive advantage, 

leading to significant barriers to entry. 

  Platforms in markets characterised by high and non-transitory barriers to 

entry. 

  Exceptional ability to leverage assets (e.g. data) from one market to another. 

 
 
Verbraucherzentrale Bundesverband e.V. 

Ex Ante Regulatory Instrument for Large Online Platforms and a New Competition Tool 

9 l 14

  Lock-in effects on (business) users and consumers, the inability of consumers 
to multi-home and the presence of high switching-costs for consumers (i.e. 
costs for consumers associated with substituting the service/product/provider). 
(Degree of) Availability of an equivalent substitute for the 
service/product/provider.  

  Asymmetrical bargaining power vis-a-vis business partners/competitors. 

E.g. the ability to control access and determine conditions for market 
participants of an ecosystem. 

  Exceptional financial power or access to other resources. 

  Vertical integration or activities on other related markets. 

3. EX ANTE REGULATION: LISTS OF PROHIBITIONS/RESTRICTIONS AND 
OBLIGATIONS 

In the following, vzbv proposes practises of gatekeeper platforms to be included in the 
lists of prohibited or restricted practices and obligations. The European Commission 
should consider supplementing the lists of prohibited practices and obligations with 
additional guidance notices. In order to ensure that the Ex Ante Regulation reflects 
current market characteristics and business practices it is essential that the European 
Commission regularly reviews and updates this list. 

3.1 Prohibited/Restricted Practices 

The following practices should be considered for inclusion in the list of 
prohibited/restricted practices: 

  Prohibition of self-preferencing of own or linked services/products (e.g. in ad 
tech and search). This could be based on examples like access regulation and 
its non-discrimination principles developed for telecoms markets and then 
adapted to digital markets. 

  Prohibition of restrictions of data portability beyond the GDPR. 

  Deliberate product/service degradation on specific services channels in order 
to force consumers to agree to terms and conditions/install applications on their 
devices. E.g. deliberately reduced functionality of a map service on mobile 
phones web browsers in order to force consumers to install the platforms app 
(while the service fully functions with standard web browsers). 

  Restrictions on using/integrating consumer data obtained from different 

branches of a conglomerate firm or through different services (for example 
where data has been collected through the leveraging of market power).  

  Prohibition of practices of tying and bundling: In cases when gatekeepers sell 

a good or grant access to a service on the condition that the consumer 
uses/purchases a different service/product or agrees to terms and conditions 
that could be viewed as separate but are tied (“sold”) together as a bundle. This 
includes cases where consumers want to get access to service and have to 
agree to use/install a different service or accept terms and conditions allowing 
the firm to collect and analyse more consumer data.  

 
 
10 l 14 

Ex Ante Regulatory Instrument for Large Online Platforms and a New Competition Tool

Verbraucherzentrale Bundesverband e.V.

  Restrictions on gathering and/or use of data by gatekeepers from their 

business users to gain competitive advantage (to the extent necessary beyond 
the P2B Regulation).  

  Restrictions on the use of pre-installation and defaults (in particular for 

browsers and search engines) and of other nudging techniques: imposing a 
“fairness-by-design” duty on gatekeepers to ensure that they make it as easy as 
possible for consumers to make genuine choices (rather than as presently, 
exploiting recognised consumer behavioural biases to channel/manipulate 
consumer choices and lock-in consumers). 

  Restrictions on the exercise of bargaining power vis-a-vis trading partners in 
specified areas (to preclude discrimination, forced data sharing/withholding of 
data, unfair terms and conditions in relation to, for example, payment terms, 
liability, rights assignments) and, where relevant, to preclude gatekeepers’ use 
of unfair commercial practices vis-à-vis consumers.  

3.2 Ex Ante Regulation: Targeted Obligations  

Obligations could be included where they can complement the prohibited/restricted 
practises set out above. These could include: 

  Obligations to report specified relevant information to the EU Online Platform 
Observatory or the “Taskforce” (see next chapter) on particular activities on a 
regular basis.  

  Obligation to support full effective data portability by consumers, including 

automated transfer of data to competitors upon consumers’ request. 

4. NEW EU TASKFORCE: ENFORCEMENT OF EX-ANTE REGULATION AND NCT 

Large gatekeeper platforms can take the form of conglomerate companies whose 
business activities fall under the competence of different regulatory and supervisory 
authorities at the Member State and EU levels. But nonetheless, some recently 
emerged digital services, posing significant challenges/risks for consumer welfare and 
competition alike, are not explicitly regulated or supervised by any specific competent 
authority. That holds for example for the “multi-purpose technology” of smart digital 
assistants. Another important factor for the enforcement of the Ex Ante Regulation is 
that many of the large players concerned are typically active in different Member 
States. This fact, however, does not automatically require the creation of a new 
competent authority. Instead, vzbv proposes to evaluate the idea of establishing a new 
Taskforce led by DG COMP to enforce the Ex Ante Regulation and the NCT. 

4.1 EU Taskforce: Enforcement of Ex-Ante Regulation and NCT 

The primary principles underlying the proposed Ex Ante Regulation are competition 
related. Therefore, monitoring and enforcement could be performed by a new 
“Taskforce” led by DG COMP. At the same time, the Taskforce should also be 
responsible for the application of the case-by-case remedies envisaged in the NCT 
(see chapter on NCT below). 

 
 
Verbraucherzentrale Bundesverband e.V. 

Ex Ante Regulatory Instrument for Large Online Platforms and a New Competition Tool 

11 l 14

Depending on the specific issue at hand, the Taskforce should work in close 
cooperation with other Directorates-General2, the data protection authorities as 
well as national enforcement bodies. Given the inherent cross-border nature of 
platform conduct, the European Commission’s Taskforce would take any necessary 
enforcement decisions with respect to the listed infringements of obligations or 
prohibitions under the DSA Ex Ante Regulation, unless another authority was better 
placed to do so in a particular case. 

In enforcing the rules of the Ex Ante Regulation, the Taskforce could take account of 
infringements of the list of prohibited/restricted practises, unfair trading practices and 
competition-related issues not directly addressed by DG COMP under classic 
competition policy (e.g. cases enforced under Article 101 and 102 TFEU).  

4.2 Benefits of the EU-level Taskforce Approach 

Putting a Taskforce in place at EU level responsible for the enforcement of the Ex Ante 
Regulation and the NCT has several benefits:  

‐  Due to its double role, the Taskforce is suited to avoid inconsistencies of 

application and enforcement between the Ex Ante Regulation and the NCT. 
This approach also maximises synergies by using NCT-findings to update the 
Ex Ante Regulation, making sure it reflects current market and business realities 
(e.g. in identifying gatekeepers subject to regulation and updating the list of 
prohibited practices). 

‐  The risk of inconsistencies at Member State level enforcement and 

subsequent legal uncertainty would be avoided, while at the same time drawing 
on Member States competent authorities’ expertise in specific 
cases/markets/issues.  

‐  No major and lengthy (and thus harmful) institutional set up would be 

required to start enforcement, as the Taskforce could be put in place in a short 
timeframe. 

‐  The Taskforce could call on existing experienced staff and could be 

operational immediately. 

‐  Forum shopping by platforms would be prevented and maximum regulatory 

independence would be ensured. 

‐  DG COMP is highly experienced in the types of procedures and processes 
required for analysis and enforcement of competition-related policies, including 
interim measures, evidentiary standards and respect for due process. 
‐  The European Commission is best placed to easily facilitate EU-wide 

cooperation among the involved Member States authorities and with extra-
EU jurisdictions, as large platform players often originate from outside the EU. 

___________________________________________________________________________________________ 

2 e.g Directorate-General for Communications Networks, Content and Technology (DG CONNECT), Directorate-General 

for Internal Market, Industry, Entrepreneurship and SMEs (DG GROW), the Directorate-General for Justice and 
Consumers (DG JUST) 

 
 
12 l 14 

Ex Ante Regulatory Instrument for Large Online Platforms and a New Competition Tool

Verbraucherzentrale Bundesverband e.V.

It would be essential for the Taskforce to be vested with appropriate legal powers (e.g. 
for carrying out investigation and enforcement) and endowed with sufficient financial, 
human and technical resources to carry out this new task. 

V. THE NEW COMPETITION TOOL 
DG Competition should be endowed with the legal powers and tools to deal with 
structural competition issues. Among others, these must include carrying out market 
investigations and impose appropriate remedies, even in the absence of a dominant 
single player. Therefore, vzbv proposes a market structure-based NCT with a horizontal 
scope. It should allow the European Commission to impose behavioral and, where 
appropriate, structural remedies to improve the functioning of markets to the benefit of 
consumers and other market actors, independently of the finding of an infringement of 
Article 101 or 102 TFEU. 

1. SCOPE OF THE NEW COMPETITION TOOL 

vzbv holds that the scope of the NCT should be rather broad in order to fulfil the policy 
goals of the two initiatives. 

1.1 Horizontal Approach more suitable than limited Scope 

The European Commission should design the NCT with a horizontal approach 
instead of a limited scope. Although today many of the severe limitations of competition 
rules and enforcement are found in digital markets, limiting the NCT’s scope would not 
seem appropriate. The main reason is that the lines between digital and “traditional” 
non-digital markets are blurring and it can’t be predicted which sectors will raise 
structural concerns in the future. Also, the power of competition law results from its 
universality: It is applicable to all sectors and areas of economic life. That principle must 
not be given up. 

Adopting the NCT with a horizontal scope does not mean it must be applied in all 
sectors at present but it would make the NCT future proof if fair competition in further 
markets would be undermined by the structural problems the NCT aims to address. 

1.2 Market Structure-based Approach more suitable than Dominance-based 
Approach 

The current European competition legislation does not allow for addressing some 
specific new structural challenges to competition. These include monopolisation 
strategies by non-dominant platforms with market power or parallel leveraging 
strategies by platform-players into multiple adjacent markets. If a significant part of a 
digital market is controlled by a strong platform, this must not necessarily be a “classic” 
dominant firm. The control of ecosystems or of central strategic positions in markets (or 
“interfaces” between markets) allows non-dominant players to control suppliers’ access 
to significant segments of consumers and vice versa. This enables also non-dominant 
players to set the rules by which supply and demand meet in these markets. This ability 
of non-dominant players to set the rules raises serious competition concerns, especially 
with respect to fairness of conditions (towards consumers and third-party suppliers), 
self-preferencing and deception of consumers.  

Furthermore, if the NCT were to be dominance-based this would suggest a potentially 
significant overlap with Article 102 enforcement which should be avoided. 

 
 
Verbraucherzentrale Bundesverband e.V. 

Ex Ante Regulatory Instrument for Large Online Platforms and a New Competition Tool 

13 l 14

1.3 German Competition Law: A Blueprint for the NCT? 

law 

the  draft 

To address these problems, the draft law to reform the German competition law3 tries to 
address  the  problem  of  platforms’  with  “overriding  importance  for  competition  across 
markets”. § 19a of the current draft law of the amendment of the German competition law 
introduces a new form of platform power dubbed “overriding importance for competition 
across  markets”.  This  concept  supplements  the  concepts  of  dominance  and  “relative 
market power” (which had been introduced into German competition law before). § 19a 
of 
the  German  competition  authority 
(Bundeskartellamt)  to  remedy  anti-competitive  conduct  of  platform  players  occupying 
central  strategic  positions  in  multilateral  markets  or  networks.  vzbv  welcomes  this 
approach4 as  it  addresses  one  of  the  core  problems  for  competition  in  digital  platform 
markets and ecosystems.  
It is clearly in the interest of consumers and competitors if competition authorities can 
take action against such platform players that exploit their key position in various markets 
to  the  detriment  of  consumers  and  competitors  “without  necessarily  having  already 
crossed the threshold of market dominance in all these markets”. 

to  enable 

intended 

is 

2. COMPETENCES OF DG COMPETITION: ENFORCEMENT OF THE NCT 

Naturally, DG COMP is the competent authority for enforcing the NCT as the NCT 
should be part of the EU Competition law. In particular, the NCT should be enforced by 
a new Taskforce, also responsible for enforcing the DSA’s Ex Ante Regulation (see 
section above). This seems the most suited approach to avoid inconsistencies in the 
application and enforcement of the NCT and the Ex Ante Regulation.  

To this end, DG COMP should be endowed with the same (or equivalent) set of 
investigative powers and procedural tools as for the enforcement of competition law 
under Article 101 and 102 TFEU (including interim measures, commitment decisions, 
structural/behavioural/hybrid remedies).  

DG COMP should have the competence to inform and make legislative 
recommendations, in particular in relation to the Ex Ante Regulation (e.g. this could 
include the identification of gatekeepers and the content of the prohibitions and 
obligations list for the DSA Ex Ante Regulation). 

The NCT should allow DG COMP to the impose fines for procedural infringements or 
as penalty payments for failure to comply with the investigation or decisions and 
remedies. 

DG COMP should have the obligation to impose appropriate remedies or other 
measures within legally binding deadlines. It should also be obliged to consult all 
relevant market participants (including consumer organisations) on the structural 
market problems identified and proposed remedies or other measures. 

___________________________________________________________________________________________ 

3 BMWI - Bundesministeriums für Wirtschaft und Energie, „Entwurf eines Zehnten Gesetzes zur Änderung des Gesetzes 

gegen Wettbewerbsbeschränkungen für ein fokussiertes, proaktives und digitales Wettbewerbsrecht 4.0 (GWB-
Digitalisierungsgesetz)“, 2020, S. 1–157 <https://www.bmwi.de/Redaktion/DE/Downloads/G/gwb-
digitalisierungsgesetz-referentenentwurf.pdf?__blob=publicationFile&v=10> [accessed 2 Juli 2020]. 

4 vzbv - Verbraucherzentrale Bundesverband, Fairen Wettbewerb in digitalen Märkten sicherstellen - Stellungnahme des 

vzbv, 2020 <https://www.vzbv.de/dokument/fairen-wettbewerb-digitalen-maerkten-gewaehrleisten>. [ accessed 4. 
September 2020]. 

 
 
 
 
14 l 14 

Ex Ante Regulatory Instrument for Large Online Platforms and a New Competition Tool

Verbraucherzentrale Bundesverband e.V.

3. CASE-SPECIFIC REGULATORY INTERVENTIONS 

The NCT should deal with case-by-case specific remedies. vzbv emphasis, that the 
interventions and remedies should be as open as possible in order to allow the 
competent authority as much flexibility as needed to deal with the peculiarities of each 
case.  

The case-by-case remedies dealt within the context of the NCT should not be limited but 
applied  in  be  flexible  and  open  including  structural  and  behavioural  remedies.  The 
remedies  imposed  could  take  inspiration  from  and  should  be  consistent  with  Ex  Ante 
Regulation (see  above).  Remedies  could  address  the  supply-side,  e.g.  by  opening  up 
monopolies  or  ecosystems  or  prevent  markets  from  tipping.  They  could  address  the 
demand  side  problems,  e.g.  by  targeting  consumer  behavioural  biases  and  decision-
making  issues  mentioned  above.  This  could  include  information  disclosure  and 
presentational requirements to enable more self-determined decision-making and limit 
the exploitation of behavioural biases, facilitating consumer switching and protecting of 
consumers against unfair commercial practices. The effectiveness of consumer-facing 
remedies should be empirically verified.  
Given the dynamic character, especially of digital markets, it is necessary to regularly 
monitor the  effectiveness  of  the  imposed  remedies. This  allows  the  remedies to  be 
refined if proven ineffective or terminated if they no longer necessary. 
Potential remedies could include:  

  Data  separation  within  ecosystems  or  conglomerate  companies,  including 
restrictions  on  usage/integration  of  consumer  data  obtained  from  different 
branches/services  of  a  conglomerate  company.  For  example  where  data  has 
been collected through the leveraging of market power.  

  Data portability, giving consumers control over data sharing and mobility (e.g. 

migrating data to another service). 

  Unbundling/untying of services and terms of conditions, including in cases 
where consumers, in order to get access to a specific service, have to use/install 
a different service or accept terms and conditions allowing the firm to collect and 
analyse more consumer data than is necessary for the functioning of the service. 
  Third  parties’  access  to  data  where  this  is  a  barrier  to  entry  (under  strict 

adherence to the GDPR). 

  Third  parties’  access  to  other  inputs/services  (under  strict  adherence  to  the 

GDPR). 

  Prohibition/restrictions  of  self-preferencing  of  own  services/products  (e.g.  in 

advertisement and specialised search). 

 
 
 
