TIM Position Paper on the Digital Services Act and New 
Competition Tool  
European Commission Consultations – 8 September 2020 

TIM welcomes the EU Commission’s consultations on the Digital Services Act (DSA) and the 
New  Competition  Tool  (NCT),  which  are  both  aimed  at  introducing  rules  to  address  the 
challenges brought about by the large digital players.  

Digital  business  models  have  become  complex  and  multi-layered,  especially  due  to  the 
critical  role  of  the  big  online  platforms  governing  the  relationship  between  the  different 
parties  in  the  whole  ecosystem.  Large  gatekeepers  hold  the  key  to  the  online  user 
experience and they are the strategic partners for all actors along the value chain who want 
to participate in economic and social activities. Gatekeeper platforms should consequently 
exert their essential role in a manner that promotes fairness, competition and innovation 
for all their users, competitors and partners. 

Due to the global dimension of the issues at stake, TIM believes that an enforcement of the 
new  rules  at  EU  level  would  be  the  most  appropriate  way  to  be  effective  and  reach  a 
harmonized approach. 

Digital Services Act 

In  order  to  make  digital  market  contestable  (and  contested),  TIM  deems  it  a  priority  to 
introduce  an  ex-ante  regulatory  framework.  This  framework  should  include  asymmetric 
rules  targeted  only  at  large  gatekeepers,  clearly  identified  according  to  specific  and 
cumulative  thresholds  (e.g.  number  of  subscribers  of  the  relevant  platform,  presence  in 
several  products  and  geographical  markets),  in  order  not  to  prevent  the  emergence  and 
development of start-ups and smaller players. 

Large  gatekeepers  in  the  scope  of  the  new  regulatory  framework  should  refrain  from 
carrying out certain behaviours (blacklist) and, at the same time, perform others in order to 
ensure a fair competition (white list). 

We  propose  the  following  blacklist  of  activities/behaviours  that  large  online  digital 
gatekeepers should be forbidden to carry out: 

•  Self-preferencing; 
•  Leveraging;  
•  Use of unfair contractual terms or unfair practices; 
•  Prohibiting business users from using a competing online intermediation service. 

Such black list should be complemented by the following white list: 

•  Data Access, interoperability and portability: 

 volunteered data (directly provided by the user) 

o 
o  observed data (e.g. telematics, observed online usage behaviour) 

•  Access and interoperability of certain key facilities (software/hardware, ) which are 

critical to compete; 

•  Transparency and non-discrimination; 

  
 
 
•  Prohibition of bundling/tying with ‘must have’ services; 
•  Prohibition of unfair terms and conditions of a contract (e.g. predatory pricing, non-

price terms,  restrictions on use, exclusivity clauses etc.…); 

•  Separation (accounting and functional); 
•  Responsibility  for  possible  illegal  activities  (such  as  selling  online  illegal/harmful 
goods e.g. dangerous products, counterfeit goods, prohibited and restricted goods, 
protected  wildlife,  pet,  trafficking,  illegal  medicine  or  misleading  offerings  e.g.  on 
food supplements); 

•  Responsibility  for  activities  that  can  cause  harm  to  users  online  (which  are  not 
necessarily illegal) such as the spread of online disinformation or harmful content to 
minors. 

These lists are not to be considered as static, but can be adapted according to the specific 
challenges posed by the platforms in specific markets. 

In  addition,  we  would  like  to  point  out  some  relevant  aspects  of  the  review  of  the  2003 
eCommerce  Directive,  which  will  be  part  of  the  DSA.  In  our  opinion,  the  review  should 
preserve  the  fundamental  principles  of  the  eCommerce  Directive  such  as  the  ones  of  no 
liability described in articles 12, 13 and in Artcle14 and of no general obligation to monitor 
described in Artcle15.  

Nonetheless, due to the technical, market and judicial developments, an update to the legal 
framework may be needed on the responsibilities of some hosting services as new business 
models have emerged. We believe the provisions of Artcle14 of the eCommerce Directive 
should be amended consistently with the jurisprudence of the CJEU, which introduced the 
crucial distinction between active and passive hosting service providers. While the liability 
exemption of Artcle14 is still needed for passive hosting providers, it is essential to redefine 
the categorization and the responsibilities of online services that play an “active” role in the 
dissemination of content online. 

New Competition Tool 

Articles 101 and 102 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union are in principle 
suitable  to  tackle  anticompetitive  behaviours.  However,  their  enforcement  should  be 
improved  to  better  reflect  the  dynamics  of  the  digital  markets,  both  in  terms  of  market 
definition and in terms of speed of intervention. In-fact, according to TIM, competition law 
alone  has  proven  over  the  years  to  be  insufficient  to  provide  effective  rapid  solutions  to 
behavioural problems arising from market power in digital markets.  

Therefore,  TIM believes that  a  revised  competition  framework,  addressing  the  need for a 
quick  intervention  on  fast-moving  markets  would  be  necessary.  As  such  the  following 
measures should be considered:  

•  adapting the horizontal and vertical guidelines which would allow European firms to 

gain scale through cooperation;  

•  correctly revising the market definition notice to take into account the characteristics 

of the digital market (as per the ongoing public consultation);  
reviewing the European Merger Regulation to account for pre-emptive mergers.  

• 

  
 
On top of that, and as a second priority, the introduction of a NCT may be useful to tackle 
“residual” competition  risks  caused  by  gatekeepers  operating  at  EU level  (not  just  purely 
national players) and limited to digital markets. The NCT should be in any case structured 
as a complement to the DSA  in order to avoid an overlapping of rules and a  situation of 
overenforcement. 

EU Supervision and Enforcement 

Supervision and enforcement of both the DSA and NCT should be undertaken at EU level, 
since large online platforms operate in global ecosystems and competition concerns, arising 
in digital markets, have by definition an important cross-border dimension.  

The  EU  body  should  be  primarily  responsible  for  monitoring  markets  and  enforcing 
dedicated rules for major digital gatekeepers. This body (whether new or existent) should 
be vested with adequate resources and investigative powers, as well as with oversight and 
monitoring powers that would enable it to collect relevant information from digital firms, to 
fully appreciate the competitive dynamics of digital markets. 

  
 
