Ref. Ares(2020)4713545 - 09/09/2020

THE EUROPEAN UNION ALUMINIUM 
INDUSTRY 
THE IMPACT OF THE EU TRADE MEASURES ON THE 
COMPETITIVENESS OF DOWNSTREAM ACTIVITIES  

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 

June 2019 

GRUPPO DI RICERCHE INDUSTRIALI E FINANZIARIE - GRIF “FABIO 
GOBBO” 

LUISS GUIDO CARLI UNIVERSITY 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The EU aluminium industry. The impact of the EU trade measures on the competitiveness of downstream activities - EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 

Disclaimer 

This project has been funded with support from FACE - The Federation of Aluminium Consumers in 
Europe. GRIF “Fabio Gobbo” was asked by FACE to carry out an independent study with the aim of 
establishing a constructive and transparent exchange of views on the competitiveness of the 
aluminium value chain in the European Union with a specific focus on trade policies on unwrought 
aluminium and their impact on manufacturers of aluminium semi-finished products. To have 
consistent information and to ensure the robustness and the comparability of the quantitative analysis 
for well-informed design of policies, the study only relies on data provided by institutional sources and 
independent third parties, having market recognition for reliability. While also benefitting from the 
industry knowledge of FACE stakeholders, any views expressed herein, including interpretation(s) of 
policies, reflect the current views of the author(s), which do not necessarily correspond to the views of 
FACE. Reproduction, publication and reprint are subject to prior written authorisation of the authors. 

The study is available at: https://face-aluminium.com/wp-content/uploads/2019/06/2019-LUISS-
Study.pdf 

Authors and contributors 

Ernesto Cassetta, GRIF “Fabio Gobbo”, University of Udine, ecassetta@luiss.it 

Umberto Monarca, GRIF “Fabio Gobbo”, University of Foggia, umonarca@luiss.it 

Cesare Pozzi, GRIF “Fabio Gobbo”, LUISS University, cpozzi@luiss.it 

Davide Quaglione, GRIF “Fabio Gobbo”, D’Annunzio University of Chieti-Pescara, dquaglione@luiss.it 

Alessandro Sarra, GRIF “Fabio Gobbo”, D’Annunzio University of Chieti-Pescara, asarra@luiss.it 

GRUPPO DI RICERCHE INDUSTRIALI E FINANZIARIE - GRIF “FABIO GOBBO” 

Department of Business and Management 

LUISS Guido Carli University 

Viale Romania, 32 00197 Roma (Italia) 

Website: http://impresaemanagement.luiss.it/en/ricerca/research-centers/industrial-and-financial-research-center 

1 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The EU aluminium industry. The impact of the EU trade measures on the competitiveness of downstream activities - EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 

Key findings 

­  The competitive advantage of the EU aluminium industry lies in the technological leadership of 
the downstream segments, i.e. producing semi-finished products for many end-user industries. 

­  The  downstream  segments  account  for  about  70%  of  the  annual  turnover  of  EU  aluminium 

industry and for nearly 92% of the total industry employment. 

­ 

In the last twenty years, the EU aluminium industry has experienced massive structural changes 
with a strong decline of aluminium primary production and underinvestment being the leading 
trend. 

­  Rising dependency on imports of unwrought aluminium and intensifying competition from third 
countries  are  increasingly  becoming  key  factors  influencing  the  competitiveness  of  EU 
downstream activities. 

­  Other than unwrought aluminium, EU has constantly worsened its trade balance in all segments 

of semi-finished aluminium products over the period 2000-2017. 

­  EU  import  tariffs  on  unwrought  aluminium  have  been  ineffective  in  sustaining  primary 
aluminium production, while they are imposing additional costs to downstream  transformers 
and potentially repealing the effects of trade measures on semi-finished products. 

­ 

It can be estimated that up to 17.8 billion euros was the extra cost of the tariff for unwrought 
aluminium for EU downstream producers over the period 2000-2017. In the same time, import 
tariffs have resulted in additional revenues for EU primary and secondary (recycling) producers, 
as well as additional incomes for primary producers with duty-free access to EU internal market. 

­  From a policy perspective, EU trade measures should be placed in a broader industrial policy 
framework aimed at preserving and possibly reinforcing the competitiveness of the downstream 
activities and, in turn, of the EU aluminium industry as a whole. 

­  To this end, the study suggests to abolish import tariffs on unwrought aluminium, to define ad-
hoc measures for primary and secondary production and to provide incentives to downstream 
transformers  to  expand  their  innovative  and  technological  capabilities,  to  improve  their 
sustainability in a circular economy perspective, and to enhance, including with the tools of the 
so-called fourth industrial revolution, the relationships with relevant end-user industries. 

2 

 
 
 
 
 
 
The EU aluminium industry. The impact of the EU trade measures on the competitiveness of downstream activities - EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 

Executive summary 

Context and objectives of the study 

The aluminium industry is an industry that is essential to the economy of modern countries as it provides 
a range of highly differentiated products, from those for final consumption to the intermediate inputs 
that are required for many high-tech industries. Aluminium is currently used as an input material in the 
manufacturing  of  investment  goods  (automotive,  shipbuilding,  aerospace,  building  and  construction, 
mechanical  and  electrical  engineering),  and  consumer  goods  (like  mobile  devices,  computers, 
recreational  vehicles,  household  appliances,  etc.).  Regarded  as  one  of  the  most  sustainable  metals, 
aluminium  is  increasingly  used  by  companies  strongly  committed  to  improving  their  environmental 
performance. 

The  global  aluminium  industry  has  undergone  fundamental  changes  in  recent  years  in  terms  of 
geographical  relocation  of  production  and  consumption,  degree  of  concentration  and  integration, 
development  of  new  end-use  markets,  increasing  financialisation,  and  international  trade.  Globally, 
China’s role has increased substantially in all segments of the aluminium value chain as well as in the 
consumption of aluminium products, to the detriment of North America and the EU.  

The decline in the EU aluminium industry has been particularly severe in the upstream segments of the 
value chain, causing an increasing unwrought aluminium deficit and rising costs of raw materials. This 
trend has, in turn, progressively affected the competitiveness of downstream companies, which represent 
the bulk of the EU aluminium industry in terms of turnover, value added and employment. 

The structural changes in the aluminium industry have sparked renewed interest in trade policies’ role 
in driving economic development and in influencing the competitiveness of the manufacturing sector as 
a whole. The aluminium industry was recently at the core of the international debate on protectionist 
measures mainly because of the decision taken by the US administration to impose additional import 
tariffs on aluminium products. In the EU, the aluminium industry is one of the sectors that has featured 
most prominently in the anti-dumping investigations which have taken place since the conclusion of the 
Uruguay Round. 

As a result, the need for a comprehensive revision of trade rules has become increasingly clear, to take 
into account the greater complexity of international production and to place those measures in a broader 
industrial policy framework. 

Against this background, the purpose of this study is threefold: 

- 

- 

to provide a comprehensive overview of the EU aluminium industry value chain; 

to quantitatively estimate the economic impact of the EU import tariffs on unwrought aluminium 
in terms of additional costs imposed on other segments further down the value chain; 

3 

 
 
 
 
The EU aluminium industry. The impact of the EU trade measures on the competitiveness of downstream activities - EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 

- 

to strategically assess the role of import tariffs on unwrought aluminium as an industrial policy 
instrument for promoting the competitiveness of downstream activities and the EU aluminium 
industry as a whole. 

Some policy recommendations are finally made with the aim of preserving the technological leadership, 
as well as possibly restoring the industrial competitiveness, of firms producing semi-finished products, 
while also helping the EU to achieve its sustainability and industrial renaissance targets. 

Overview of the EU aluminium industry 

The aluminium industry includes a range of activities along the value chain. They can be divided into 3 
main segments: 

1.  upstream, including all the producers of the raw material from the unwrought mineral, namely 

the extractors (mining and quarrying) and the primary aluminium smelters; 

2.  downstream, involving a broad group of producers manufacturing high differentiated outputs 
(so-called  “wrought  aluminium”,  “semi-finished,”  “semis,”  or  “mill  products”)  by  rolling, 
extruding, casting and drawing unwrought aluminium into various forms; 

3.  aluminium 

recycling  and 

remelting,  comprising  producers  of  aluminium  alloys 
(recyclers/remelters)  from  metallic  waste  and  scrap  generated  either  as  a  by-product  of 
manufacturing or from recycled goods. 

For the purpose of this study, recycling and remelting activities are included in the upstream segment as 
they both produce unwrought aluminium for the downstream transformers.  

The EU  aluminium  industry  encompasses  more  than  a  thousand  companies,  directly  employs  about 
230.000 employees and is indirectly responsible for around 1 million jobs.  

Lacking raw material (i.e. bauxite), the EU aluminium industry is actually characterised by few facilities 
which produce alumina (the white powder produced by the refining of bauxite) and by a limited number 
of companies which use alumina to produce primary aluminium in any form (commodity ingots and 
value-added  products, such  as  slabs,  billets,  foundry  alloys,  and  wire  rods).  Hundreds  of  small-  and 
medium-sized vertically  non-integrated  firms  are involved  in  the  manufacturing  of  aluminium  semi-
finished products, such as extrusions, flat-rolled products, castings, foil, wire and slug.  

It can be estimated that the aluminium downstream sector now accounts for about 70% of the annual 
turnover of the EU aluminium industry and for nearly 92% of the  total  employment  in the industry, 
compared to 5% of the primary segment and 2% of the secondary segment. Secondary aluminium is 
produced by recycling and remelting aluminium-bearing scrap and/or aluminium-bearing materials. 

The global positioning of primary aluminium production has dramatically changed over the last twenty 
years. China’s role has increased substantially to the detriment of North America and the EU.  

Since 2008, the EU’s production of primary aluminium shrank by 30%. A decreasing number of EU 
member states have operating aluminium smelters. Some primary aluminium producing countries, such 
as Italy, the UK, and the Netherlands, have significantly curtailed or definitively ceased their production 
in the last few years. As a result, the EU lost more than one quarter of its smelting capacity in the period 
from  2008  to  2017.  The  process  of  disinvestment  is  almost  certain  to  continue,  as  Alcoa  recently 
announced the closure of its three aluminium smelters in Spain. 

4 

 
 
 
 
The EU aluminium industry. The impact of the EU trade measures on the competitiveness of downstream activities - EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 

Since 2004, the EU has produced more secondary (that is unwrought aluminium produced by recycling 
and remelting scrap and waste) than primary aluminium. As of 2017, however, secondary aluminium 
output has not yet matched pre-crisis levels. 

As  for  semi-finished  products,  global  manufacturing  of  aluminium  extrusions,  flat-rolled  products 
(FRPs) and aluminium castings more than doubled over the period from 2000 to 2017. China has driven 
much of this expansion, now representing around 50% of global output of aluminium semis. The EU 
production of aluminium FRPs and aluminium castings has increased in the period from 2000 to 2017, 
but at a significantly slower pace than at the global level.  In 2017, the EU production of aluminium 
extrusions  was  even  slightly  below  2000  levels,  although  global  production  has  tripled  in  the  same 
period. As a result, the EU’s share in global manufacturing of semi-finished aluminium products has 
constantly declined, from 29% in 2000 to 14% in 2017. 

Germany, Italy, and France are the largest producers of semi-finished products in the EU, representing 
about  62%  of  the EU’s  total  production  in  2017.  Germany  further  strengthened  its  leadership  in  the 
manufacturing of aluminium semis over the last few years and now constitutes about one third of the 
total  production  in  the  EU.  France,  Italy  and  Spain  have  roughly  maintained  their  share  of  total  EU 
production.  Other  EU  member  states  have  progressively  seen  their  relative  production  shrink, 
cumulatively representing less than one quarter of EU total output in 2017. 

Trade flows of unwrought and wrought aluminium products 

Over the period from 2000 to 2017, the EU’s trade balance has consistently worsened in all segments of 
the aluminium value chain. 

EU imports of unwrought aluminium increased significantly during the period from 2000 to 2017. In 
particular,  imports  in  2017  were  69%  higher  than  in  2000.  Although  EU  exports  of  unwrought 
aluminium to third countries showed a significant upward trend over the last ten years, these exports 
only constitute a negligible quantity of EU trade flows, corresponding on average to roughly 4% of the 
imports. Between 2000 and 2017, the trade deficit of unwrought aluminium has thus steadily worsened.  

In the same period, the EU trade balance in aluminium semi-finished products has also deteriorated. 

Structurally being a net exporter of FRPs, the EU has experienced an increasing trade deficit in the last 
four years. FRPs now account for the vast majority of the EU imports of semis (about 70%). The EU’s 
reliance on imported aluminium extrusions has also grown rapidly in recent years. In 2017, the EU net 
imports of  aluminium  extrusions  were  more  than  five  times  higher  than  in  2000.  Finally,  the  EU  is 
currently a net importer of aluminium castings, including aluminium road wheels as one of the main 
product categories. Much of the growth of EU imports of aluminium semis is due to the increase of 
Chinese imports to the EU.  In 2017,  the amount  of  aluminium extrusions  imported from  China was 
about 36 times higher than in 2000, imports of Chinese FRPs increased by 20 times, while the imports 
of aluminium casting from China rose 46 times. 

A notable exception to the EU trade imbalance is the trade surplus registered in the aluminium waste 
and scrap sector since 2002. This surplus has even increased over the last few years, notwithstanding 
the fact that secondary production is actually regarded as the most energy efficient method of producing 
aluminium—especially for countries with high energy and carbon costs and significant availability of 
secondary raw material. As waste and scrap are typically used as input for secondary production, the 
positive EU trade balance should be interpreted as an outflow of raw materials, although these are of 

5 

 
 
 
 
The EU aluminium industry. The impact of the EU trade measures on the competitiveness of downstream activities - EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 

low quality and are very expensive to sort and process. Asian countries, such as China and India, are 
markets to which an increasing quantity of waste and scrap has been exported. 

EU trade policies on unwrought aluminium 

A complex system of import tariffs currently applies to unwrought and wrought aluminium products.  

With regard to unwrought aluminium, after two successive autonomous temporary suspensions, adopted 
in 2007 and 2013, the conventional customs duty rates are respectively 3% for not alloyed aluminium, 
4% for aluminium slabs and billets and 6% for foundry alloys. Unwrought aluminium can be imported 
into the EU duty-free from countries having signed Preferential Trade Agreements (PTAs) with the EU 
and from less developed countries (SPGA) covered by the Generalised Scheme of Preferences (GSP). 

Over the period 2000-2017, about half of the imports of unwrought, not alloyed, aluminium originated 
from countries with duty-free access to the EU market. The share of duty-free imports has increased in 
periods in which imports  are  sensibly lower  in quantity, such as during  the  economic  crisis.  Among 
countries subject to the tariff, Russia accounts for slightly less than 38% of the EU’s total imports of 
unwrought, not alloyed, aluminium, also representing about 63% of the total imports subject to the tariff. 
Conversely, Mozambique (17%) and Iceland (16%) are the main exporters among duty-free countries. 

The share of imports of aluminium alloys which were duty-free averaged 75% during the period 2000-
2017. Among countries with duty-free access to the EU internal market, Norway and Iceland are by far 
the leading exporters, accounting together for 57% of the EU’s imports of slabs and billets and 47% of 
the EU’s imports of foundry alloys. Among countries subject to duties, the UAE accounts for slightly 
less than 18% of total EU imports of alloyed slabs and billets in 2017 (equivalent to about 55% of the 
total imports subject to duties in the same year) and 16% of total EU imports of foundry alloys (about 
39% of the total imports subject to duties in the same year). 

EU trade policy also offers companies the option of processing imported products without paying any 
duty.  Companies  can  temporarily  import  raw  materials  or  semi-manufactured  goods  from  various 
countries, assemble  or transform them so as to  re-export the products  for  final  consumption in  third 
countries.  In  the  period  2000-2017,  the  inward  processing  procedure  was  extensively  used  by  EU 
companies both for not alloyed aluminium (averaging 43% of the total import subject to duties) and 
aluminium alloys (averaging 39% of the total import subject to duties). 

Estimates  of  the  impact of import  tariffs  on  unwrought  aluminium  on  the  aluminium  industry  value 
chain 

The adoption of import tariffs is meant to increase prices of both imported and domestic goods. Given 
the regional market conditions and the structural characteristics of the EU aluminium industry, there is 
an incentive for domestic producers of unwrought aluminium, including those with duty-free access to 
the EU internal market, to align their prices with the highest possible level, namely the duty-paid price. 
This theoretical prediction is largely confirmed by findings of many studies focusing on the aluminium 
industry. 

The price increase induced by import tariffs imposes extra costs on companies operating in segments 
further  down  the  value  chain,  in  particular  on  downstream  transformers,  while  simultaneously 
representing a net transfer of financial resources to upstream activities.  

6 

 
 
 
 
The EU aluminium industry. The impact of the EU trade measures on the competitiveness of downstream activities - EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 

As such, they correspond to extra revenues for primary and secondary producers (in addition to revenue 
for EU customs). EU primary and secondary aluminium producers should in principle use the additional 
revenues to compensate for cost differences with respect to extra-EU competitors as well as to invest in 
improving their products and production technologies. Moreover, as a result of current PTAs, extra costs 
for  EU  downstream  transformers  also  represent  additional  revenues  for  primary  producers  based  in 
countries from which primary aluminium can be imported on a duty-free basis (mainly Norway, Iceland, 
and Mozambique).  

Increasing international competition from developing countries and limited bargaining power vis-à-vis 
their customers have mostly prevented EU downstream transformers from further passing through the 
extra costs imposed by import tariffs down the value chain, thus progressively squeezing their margins 
and putting  further pressure  on  their  survival,  in  particular  on  SMEs.  Whenever  partial  or full pass-
through is possible, import tariffs  would still result  in  higher  prices of semi-finished  products to the 
detriment of EU end-user industries and final consumers. 

Total estimated cumulative extra costs sustained by EU aluminium downstream industry, net of inward 
processing,  range  from  €9.7  to  €17.8  billion  in  the  period  2000-2017.  Those  additional  expenses 
represent up to 75% of the turnover of the European downstream aluminium industry in 2015. This also 
implies yearly average extra costs ranging between €529 million and €1 billion. 

Impact on downstream transformers of the EU import tariffs on unwrought aluminium (2000-2017, € 
billion - real 2018) 

Scenario 

Cumulative 
extra-costs for 
EU downstream 
transformers 

Duty 
revenues  
(net of 
inward 
processing) 

EU primary 
producers 

Extra revenues 

Primary 
producers 
with duty free 
access to the 
EU 

EU secondary 
producers 

Lower bound 

Upper bound 

  9,7   

    1,4  

   17,8 

     3,9  

    2,6 

     4,8 

    2,5 

    3,1   

     4,6  

     5,8   

* Duty revenues are net of inward processing of unwrought aluminium. 
Source: Authors’ own elabouration. 

The largest share of the extra costs translated into extra revenues for remelters and refiners based in the 
EU producing secondary aluminium (33% of total extra costs). The price increase due to the EU import 
tariffs also led to extra revenues for EU smelters (28% of total extra costs) and for primary producers 
based in countries from which primary aluminium can be imported on a duty-free basis (26% of total 
extra costs). 

Assessing EU trade measures on unwrought aluminium from an industrial policy perspective  

At the EU level, the task of supporting the aluminium industry was mainly left to trade rules, including 
the use of import tariffs as the main industrial policy measure. National measures were primarily aimed 
at  sustaining  existing  upstream  activities  by  lowering  their  energy  costs,  often  as  a  part  of  a  wider 

7 

 
 
 
 
The EU aluminium industry. The impact of the EU trade measures on the competitiveness of downstream activities - EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 

regulatory  intervention  for  energy-intensive  sectors.  National  governments  were  also  left  with  the 
burden of dealing with the economic and social consequences of shuttered smelting facilities. 

The import tariffs on unwrought aluminium were mainly justified by the need to prevent EU smelters 
from  reducing  their  production  or  even  shutting  down  their  facilities,  eventually  moving  them  to 
countries with low energy and labour costs, as well as lax environmental regulations. In turn, this would 
make more difficult for EU producers of semi-finished products and end-user industries to reliably and 
competitively source unwrought aluminium and aluminium products. 

The customs duty on imports of unwrought aluminium has not worked as expected in achieving the EU 
objectives. 

The  EU’s  production  of  primary  aluminium  has  decreased  significantly  because  of  the  major 
curtailments and shutdown of numerous EU smelters. More than 11,300 jobs were lost in the upstream 
segment, including in the alumina and metal supply sectors, in the period 2002-2015. Consequently, the 
EU  trade  deficit  regarding  unwrought  aluminium  has  considerably  worsened  and  will  be  further 
exacerbated with the closure of additional smelters. 

In 2017, the EU’s primary aluminium production was about 27% of the EU’s apparent consumption of 
primary aluminium. Furthermore, in the same year, as a consequence of several smelter closures, the 
total installed smelting capacity in the EU was instead equal to 30% of the EU’s apparent consumption 
of primary aluminium. The increasing demand for primary aluminium has been met by rising imports. 
Dependence  on  imported  unwrought  aluminium  for  the  production  of  aluminium  semi-finished  and 
finished products has thus steadily increased. 

No increases in production capacity or new entries in the unwrought aluminium segment are expected 
in  the  EU  member  states  in  the  next  few  years.  This  will  further  increase  the  EU’s  dependence  on 
imports, as unwrought aluminium consumption is expected to grow, though at a slower pace than in the 
past. 

Import tariffs, having failed to sustain the EU’s primary aluminium production, have negatively affected 
the competitiveness of other segments of the value-added industrial chain, especially downstream users 
that are not able to pass through the price increase of unwrought aluminium.  

An effective protection of segments further down the value chain would necessitate sourcing unwrought 
aluminium at the lowest possible costs, leaving aside any issues related to security and continuity of 
supply.  The  adoption  of  import  tariffs  works  exactly  in  the  opposite  direction  by  potentially 
counteracting the effects of trade measures in downstream segments (i.e. import tariffs on semi-finished 
products). Not surprisingly, many countries such as China have adopted policies to make unwrought 
aluminium cheaper as to explicitly confer a cost advantage on domestic manufacturers of semis. 

The overall effects are clearly visible. In 2017, EU production of aluminium extrusions was slightly 
below  2000  levels,  although  global  production  has  tripled  in  the  same  period.  The  production  of 
aluminium FRPs and castings has increased compared to 2000, but at a significantly slower pace than 
on  the global  level.  In  the  period  2000-2017,  the  EU’s  trade  balance  has constantly  worsened  in  all 
sectors of aluminium semi-finished products, as consumption of semi-finished aluminium products has 
increased at a compound growth annual rate of 3% in the same period. 

The impact has been different depending on the specifics of downstream producers, with specialised 
SMEs  inevitably  suffering  more  than  vertically  integrated  companies.  Better  performing  companies 

8 

 
 
 
 
The EU aluminium industry. The impact of the EU trade measures on the competitiveness of downstream activities - EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 

have  generally  been  characterized  by  long-standing  customer  relationships—based  on  geographical 
proximity, flexibility and customization—with end-user industries. 

The autonomous temporary suspension of customs duty, adopted in 2007 for not alloyed aluminium and 
in  2013  for  aluminium  slabs  and  billets,  which  was  primarily  intended  to  reduce  input  costs  for 
downstream aluminium users while preserving the profitability of the upstream segment, has failed to 
reverse the described trends. 

Industrial policy recommendations for the competiveness of the EU aluminium industry 

The  competitive  advantage  of  the  EU  aluminium  value  chain  undoubtedly  lies  in  the  technological 
leadership of the downstream activities. From a broader industrial policy perspective, it is thus essential 
to  provide  all  the  right  support  to  maintain  this  leadership  and  possibly  reinforce  the  economic  and 
industrial competitiveness of firms producing semi-finished products and using aluminium products.  

Overall this report’s findings suggest the following policy recommendations: 

­ 

Import  tariffs  on  unwrought  aluminium  should  be  abolished.  A  customs  duty  on  unwrought 
aluminium  should  not  be  regarded  as  the  right  policy  instrument,  as  it  artificially  raises 
downstream costs without offering any appreciable results in supporting upstream production. 

­  The maintenance of primary aluminium production can be justified only through recognising its 
strategic value for the entire EU economy. Government intervention may be required to avoid 
being totally dependent on imports. 

­  Secondary aluminium production should be encouraged through appropriate support schemes 
other than customs duties (e.g. by promoting innovative sorting and separation technologies, 
consistent  product  design,  etc.)  and  by  creating  incentives  for  the  secondary  raw  materials 
produced in the EU to be increasingly recycled and reused domestically. 

­  Maintaining the technological leadership and possibly  reinforcing  the competitiveness  of the 
EU’s semi-finished transformers would require policy measures other than simply reducing the 
costs these firms incur while procuring the inputs and intermediates. The suggested removal of 
import tariffs on unwrought aluminium would generate additional financial resources (estimated 
between  530  million  and  1  billion  euros  per  year)  for  EU  downstream  transformers’ 
investments. Incentives for downstream transformers should be primarily directed at expanding 
their  innovative,  research  and  technological  capacities  and  at  improving  their  sustainability, 
resource efficiency and environmental performances from a circular economy perspective.  

­  Finally,  improving  the  competitiveness  of  the  whole  EU  aluminium  value  chain  requires 
enhancing,  including  with  the  tools  of  the  so-called  fourth  industrial  revolution,  the 
collaborations and the relationships between EU semi-finished transformers and relevant end-
user industries. 

9 

 
 
 
 
