Legal Affairs and Administration 
Suvi Sasi-Gouatarbès 

7.9.2020 

1 (3)  

The Commission's Public Consultation on a New Competition Tool - Views of 
Confederation of Finnish Industries EK 

1 About us 

2 General 

Confederation  of  Finnish  Industries  (EK)  is  the  leading  business  organisation  in 
Finland. EK represents the entire private sector and companies of all sizes. EK has 
24 member associations and approximately 16,000 member companies of which 96 
% are SMEs. EK represents the interests of its members in business and employment 
matters.  

EK is of the opinion that a strong and open European Single Market is vital for the 
prosperity of the EU and all the Member States. Competition policy plays an important 
role in ensuring the success of European companies and economy. We would like to 
point out the following issues regarding the proposed new competition tool. 

EK supports the protection and promotion of effective competition in all markets. For 
the sake of European economy, effective competition and level playing field within 
the internal market must be safeguarded. Realistic market access must be ensured 
and  new  entrants  must  be  able  to  operate  in  the  market  without  the  risk  of  being 
hampered by market players distorting competition. EK therefore  understands and 
supports  the  Commission's  aim  to  address  all  harmful  competition  problems. 
However, EK emphasizes that the problems related to alleged structural competition 
problems  should  not  be  addressed  hastily  or  in  a  fragmented  manner.  When 
considering instruments to address specific competition concerns, it is important to 
first evaluate and define thoroughly the nature and effects of the alleged problems in 
relevant  markets.  Following  this  assessment,  the  Commission's  various  regulatory 
proposals and their effects should be considered as an ensemble. Increase in ad hoc 
regulation can be a threat to the coherent, fair and effective application of competition 
rules and thus, to the level playing field.  

3 The Combined Effect of The Various Proposals Must Be Taken Into Account  

EK  is  concerned  that  the  Commission  is  currently  considering  several  proposals 
linked  either  directly  or  indirectly  with  competition  law.  Thus,  it  is  challenging  to 
evaluate  in  advance  the  combined  effect  of  all  proposals  to  market  operators.  In 
addition to the proposed new competition tool, the Commission is currently evaluating 
the need for a new ex ante -regulatory framework regarding large online platforms as 
well  as  reviewing  the  market  definition  notice.  In  the  field  of  industrial  policy  the 
recently published White Paper on Foreign Subsidies contains elements referring to 
competition  law.  In  addition  to  the  ongoing  consultations,  the  ECN  +  Directive 
(2019/1)  promoting  effective  enforcement  of  competition  law  is  currently  being 
implemented in the Member States. EK emphasizes that when considering regulatory 
reforms, it is crucial to examine the overall  impact of the various  proposals on the 
market and companies operating therein. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
Legal Affairs and Administration 
Suvi Sasi-Gouatarbès 

7.9.2020 

2 (3)  

4 The Current Competition Regime Works 

The  current  competition  regime  has  been  established  over  decades.  The  ground 
rules of the current competition regime have proved their worth and are applicable 
as such in different markets. Thus, a potential reform of established competition rules 
or  increase  in  regulation,  must  be  approached  with  caution.  In  EK's  view,  the 
structural competition concerns raised by the Commission can be largely addressed 
by the current rules and, if needed, by updated or new sector-specific guidelines or 
notices  given  by  competent  authorities.  EK  underlines  that  the  growth  potential  of 
European companies should not be unduly restricted by reforms which unnecessarily 
tighten current regulations. However, we find it equally important to protect especially 
SMEs against unfair competition. 

5 Better Legal Protection Needed 

In all options of the Commission's proposal for a new competition tool, the discretion 
and  competence  of  competition  authorities  increase  significantly.  To  balance  this, 
appropriate and effective legal measures are needed to protect those operators who 
would be subject to the use of the competition tool. In this respect, the Commission's 
proposal is incomplete and needs to be clarified. We underline that the content and 
limits  of  the  competition  authorities'  discretion  and  powers  should  be  defined  in 
advance  in  a  transparent  and  clear  manner.  The  term  "structural  competition 
problem"  and  the  criteria  for  identifying  these  kinds  of  problems  need  also  to  be 
defined. In addition, all corrective measures should be proportionate  and their use 
should be based on a thorough economic analysis. EK is especially critical of the use 
of  structural  remedies  in  situations  which  would  not  require  a  finding  of  an  actual 
infringement.  Structural  remedies  have  far-reaching  consequences  from  the 
companies'  point  of  view  and  an  appropriate  appeal  process  must  be  ensured.  In 
practice an appeal process would delay the use of the competition tool and thus, it 
would not be a quick-fix to the structural competition problems. EK therefore invites 
the  Commission  to  consider  more  thoroughly  the  appropriateness  of  structural 
remedies as a corrective measure.   

6 Market Functioning Test Needs to be Clarified 

EK welcomes the idea that the use of the competition tool would be based on a proper 
market functioning test. However, the proposal is unclear about the contents of the 
test and whether the results of the ongoing market definition consultation will be taken 
into account in further consideration regarding the proposed competition tool. At a 
general level, EK states that the test must be realistic, transparent, predictable and 
take into account the characteristics of the market in question. A thorough economic 
analysis is an essential part of the test as well as a detailed market investigation.  It 
is important that companies are able to evaluate in advance the scope of application 
of the competition tool. In this respect, it should be borne in mind that all markets are 
different  and  it  would  be  challenging  to  create  a  tool  which  would  be  applicable 
horizontally without problems. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
Legal Affairs and Administration 
Suvi Sasi-Gouatarbès 

7.9.2020 

3 (3)  

7 Finally 

EK  understands  that  there  may  be  a need  for  a  new  competition  tool  in  situations 
where effective competition is limited, but the situation cannot, for some reason, be 
addressed  by  existing  competition  rules.  However,  it  should  be  examined  further 
whether  there  really  are  potential  gaps  in  existing  competition  rules.  The 
Commission's current proposal regarding the new competition tool is not sufficiently 
thorough in this respect. The proposal needs to be defined more clearly as all risks 
to  legal  security,  coherent  and  equal  application  must  be  avoided.  EK  therefore 
encourages the Commission to further explore the need for a new competition tool 
and  to  pay  particular  attention  to  at  least  the  following  issues  in  its  further 
preparations: 

a.  The  combined  effects  between  various  competition  law  related  proposals 

need to be further examined;  

b.  It is important to maintain in force the existing, well established competition 
rules  and  principles.  If  amendments  to  existing  rules  are  necessary,  they 
should be made by updating current (or drafting new) authority guidelines and 
notices, not by  legal reforms. All potential amendments should be reviewed 
regularly and altered/abolished with ease, if found necessary; 

c.  If  a  new  competition  tool  is  created,  the  tool  must  be  simple,  predictable, 
proportionate and applied in an equal manner. The coherent application of the 
tool in the internal market must be assured. The scope of application should 
be  considered  thoroughly,  based  on  an  economic  analysis  and  market 
investigation; 

d.  The  discretion  and  powers  of  the  competent  authority  must  be  clearly  and 

unambiguously described in advance;  

e.  The  remedies  must  be  equitable  and  predictable.  The  proposed  structural 
remedies  have  far-reaching  and  unpredictable  consequences  to  companies 
and markets and are therefore not acceptable; 

f.  The  relationship  between  the  competition  tool  and,  in  particular,  ex  ante 
regulation needs to be clarified. It must also be thoroughly considered whether 
there is a real need for both instruments and how to avoid overlaps between 
these  instruments,  other  competition  law  related  proposals  and  existing 
competition regime. Excessive regulation must be avoided, therefore special 
attention  should  be  paid  to  the  combined  effects  and  consequences  of  all 
proposed competition law related reforms. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
