Eu travel tech position paper on ex ante regulation to complement competition 
law in the digital era 

I. 

Introduction  

This  paper1  presents  eu  travel  tech’s  position  on  the  debate  over  whether ex ante 
regulation needs to be adopted by the European Union to complement competition 
law  in  the  digital  era.  Its  purpose  is  to  share  with  the  European  Commission  the 
experience  of  its  members  in  dealing  with  large  consumer-facing  digital  platforms 
active  in  several  markets  (which  we  refer  to  as  “Systemic  Digital  Platforms”)  and,  in 
particular,  Google  on  which  they  and  other  business  users  depend  for  material 
volumes of user traffic. eu travel tech will show that ex ante regulation is needed to 
prevent  “Systemic  Digital  Platforms”  from  leveraging  their  market  power  at  the 
expense of their business users and consumers.  

eu travel tech represents the interests of travel technology companies. eu travel tech 
uses its position at the centre of the travel and tourism sector to promote a consumer-
driven, innovative and competitive industry that is transparent and sustainable. Our 
membership spans Global Distribution Systems (GDSs), Online Travel Agencies (OTAs), 
Travel  Management  Companies  in  business  travel  (TMCs)  and  Metasearch  Search 
Engines (MSEs).2 

This  paper  is  divided  in  nine  Parts.  Part  II  contains  an  executive  summary.  Part  III  
provides an overview of the various issues posed by Systemic Digital Platforms in the 
EU  travel  tech  sector.  Part  IV  makes  a  case  for  adopting ex ante  rules  aimed  at 
controlling  the  market  power  of  Systemic  Digital  Platforms,  explaining  why 
competition law alone is inadequate for that task. Part  V examines the appropriate 
legal  basis  for  adopting  such ex ante  rules.  Part  VI  identifies  objective  criteria  to 
identify companies that it would be appropriate to subject to such ex ante rules, while 
Part VII  lays down the principles that should form the content of regulation. Part VIII  
includes our suggestions with regard to institutions and enforcement. Finally, Part IX 
concludes. 

II. 

Executive summary 

Core problem and focus.  While  several  digital  platforms  can  be  characterized  as 
“systemic”, the  present  paper  focuses on  the  behavior  of  one such  Systemic  Digital 
Platform, namely Google. Like most online businesses, many OTAs and MSEs are reliant 
on Google for a material portion of user traffic, be it organic or paid. In many cases, 

1 The paper was produced by the EU competition law firm Geradin Partners, on behalf of eu travel tech.  
2   eu  travel  tech's  members  include  Amadeus,  Booking.com,  eDreams  ODIGEO,  Expedia  Group, 
Travelport,  and  Skyscanner.  Associate  members  include  American  Express  GBT.  Strategic  Partners 
include Lastminute.com, etraveli, Trainline, Travix, Travelgenio, OAG and CWT. 

1 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
customers  begin  their  journey  with  Google  Search.  This  control  of  the  top  of  the 
customer  purchase  funnel  enables  Google  to  act  as  a  bottleneck,  by  e.g.,  diverting 
traffic from OTAs and MSEs into its own competing vertical travel search products, to 
the detriment of OTAs and MSEs. Google’s conduct harms innovation as by directing 
users to its vertical products (Hotel Finder, Google Flights, etc.), Google prevents OTAs 
or  MSEs  from  differentiating  themselves,  other  than  on  price,  or  even  from  earning 
revenue. This reduces competition and innovation, and harms consumer choice. 

There is a need for ex ante regulation. eu travel tech supports the work done by DG 
Competition.  However,  intervention  based  on  competition  law  alone  many  not  be 
sufficient to address and deter anticompetitive conduct by Systemic Digital Platforms. 
Rather, we believe that existing ex post enforcement should be complemented by ex 
ante rules, which could address certain limitations of antitrust enforcement, ensuring 
EU markets remain fair and contestable to the benefit of consumers. 

Which online platforms should be ex ante regulation?   The  Commission  should 
produce  a  definition  of  Systemic  Digital  Platforms  that  is  neither  under-  nor  over-
inclusive, i.e. that captures those (but only those) platforms whose systemic role in the 
digital economy is such that their conduct threatens the fairness and openness of EU 
markets,  without 
imposing  unnecessary  regulatory  burdens  on  other  market 
participants.  We  think  a  workable  definition  would  be  that  a  digital  platform  is 
systemic if the following cumulative conditions are met: 

(a)  Its  activities  span  over  a  significant  part  of  the  EU  internal  market  and  are 
protected by high barriers to entry, such as economies of scale, and direct and 
indirect network effects; 

(b)  It acts as a private gatekeeper to critical online services for an exceptionally 
large  population  of  consumers,  which  single  home;  hence  allowing  it  to  act 
without constraint when it sets the rules of the game for the services it controls. 
(c)  It  is  able  to  leverage  its  unique  assets  (data,  customer  base,  technological 

assets, etc.) into new markets and exclude rivals.  

Content  of  ex  ante  regulation.  Instead  of  laying  down  highly  detailed  and 
prescriptive  rules,  the ex ante  regulation  should  set  out  core  principles,  which  are 
fleshed out in an accompanying guidance paper and further developed through the 
enforcement  process.  More  specifically,  we  believe  that  these  principles  should 
address several practices that are particularly detrimental to the travel industry and 
which  may  also  affect  other  industries,  including  the  ability  of  Systemic  Digital 
Platforms  to:  (i)  engage  in  self-preferencing,  e.g.  when  Google  discounts  organic 
search results in favor of its own products or advertising; (ii) internal combine and use 
data across products and services; (iii) impede multi-homing to entrench the Systemic 
Digital Platform’s position by “locking in” users and erecting barriers to entry.  

Designation of  a platform as “systemic”.  The  Commission  should  have exclusive 
jurisdiction  to  designate  a  digital  platform  as  “systemic”.  The  effect  of  such  a 

2 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
designation should be that the Systemic Digital Platform is automatically subject to 
the ex ante rules, which may then be adapted on a case by case basis to the particular 
characteristics of the platform in question. The geographic scope of the designation 
should reflect the EU-wide jurisdiction of the Commission and the cross-border nature 
of the relevant Systemic Digital Platforms, i.e. it should cover all of the Member States 
in which the Systemic Digital Platform is active.  

Enforcement of the ex ante rules. Enforcement could be based on a system of parallel 
competences between the Commission and national authorities, drawing inspiration 
from the mechanism in place for the enforcement of EU competition law according to 
Regulation 1/2003. Were similar principles to govern the enforcement of ex ante rules, 
we would typically expect the Commission to be the authority “well placed to act”, as 
the practices of large digital platforms are usually cross-border in nature and affect 
several Member States at once. The competent authority should be vested with the 
power to take all necessary measures to ensure the effet utile of the ex ante rules, lest 
we end up with toothless regulation. 

III. 

The problems faced by the travel sector 

Digitization  has  changed  profoundly  the  way  people  live,  communicate  with  each 
other  and  travel.  For  instance,  digitization  has  seen  the  rise  of  certain  large  digital 
platforms that intermediate between a variety of businesses and consumers. This has 
given rise to new dynamics and in some cases new competitive challenges.  Protected 
by significant  barriers to entry (strong  network  effects and  economies of scale  and 
scope,  marginal  costs  often  close  to  zero,  primarily  single-homing  customers,  wide 
access to competitively relevant data, etc.),3 a small subset of platforms have become 
“digital gatekeepers” to markets, customers and information, thus putting in danger 
the fairness and openness of EU markets.4 There is already evidence of how Systemic 
Digital  Platforms  can  use  their  systemic  role  to  cement  their  market  power  and 
leverage it into new markets, as well as to impose unfair conditions on their business 
customers (e.g., excessive data extraction). Once a market has tipped in their favor, it 
becomes extremely difficult  for both existing rivals and new entrants to compete. This 
stifles innovation and harms consumers. 

3   Stigler  Committee  on  Digital  Platforms,  Final  Report,  September  2019,  available  at 
https://research.chicagobooth.edu/-/media/research/stigler/pdfs/digital-platforms---committee-report---
stigler-center.pdf?la=en, (the “Stigler Report”), pages 34-41. See also Jacques Crémer, Yves-Alexandre 
de  Montjoye  and  Heike  Schweitzer,  “Competition  Policy  for  the  digital  era”,  Final  Report  (2019), 
available  at  https://ec.europa.eu/competition/publications/reports/kd0419345enn.pdf  (the  “Crémer 
Report”), pages 20-21.  

4   Communication from the Commission to the European Parliament, the Council, the European Economic 
and Social Committee and the Committee of the Region, Shaping Europe’s digital future, COM(2020) 
67 final, page 8.  

3 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The travel sector is no exception, as it has grown heavily dependent on – and exposed 
to the problematic conduct of – one of these gatekeepers, namely Google, on which 
this  paper  will  focus.  Yet,  our  concerns  are  far  from  being  specific  to  the  travel 
industry.  Indeed,  similar  concerns  about  Google’s  conduct  have  been  voiced  by 
companies operating in many other sectors (e.g., comparison shopping services, news 
publishing, etc.). This serves to illustrate how the issues posed by Google’s conduct are 
at  their  core systemic  and structural:  they  stem  from  Google’s  abuse  of  its  quasi-
monopoly in general search (and related advertising), which act as a gateway for user 
traffic to online businesses. 

At the same time, our concerns are not necessarily limited to Google. Rather, Google’s 
practices  should  be  regarded  as  examples  of  how  a  large  tech  firm  may  use  its 
gatekeeping role to gain anticompetitive advantage in new markets and/or entrench 
its  position  on  existing  markets.  Indeed,  companies  in  similar  gatekeeping  positions 
engage  in  similar  practices.  For  this  reason, ex ante  regulation  should  not  refer  to 
named undertakings, but should focus on the conduct of gatekeepers that threaten 
the openness and fairness of EU markets. 

The  Commission  is  well  aware  of  Google’s  quasi-monopoly  over  general  search:  at 
least since 2008, Google has consistently held remarkably high market shares across 
all  27  EU  Member  States,  in  most  cases  exceeding  90%,  while  no  effective  entry  has 
taken  place.5  Coupled  with  strong  barriers  to  entry  such  as  network  effects, 
economies  of  scale,  access  to  click-and-query  data,  and  the  need  for  significant 
investments,6  this  means  that  Google’s  position  is  virtually  incontestable.  That  has 
enabled Google to become the gatekeeper of user traffic flowing through its search 
engine. 

Naturally, that has not left the travel sector unaffected. Like most online businesses, 
many  OTAs  and  MSEs  –  even  those  with  a  highly  recognizable  brand  and  a  strong 
direct  relationship  with  consumers  –  are  reliant  on  Google  for  a  material  portion  of 
user traffic, be it organic or paid. In many cases, customers begin their journey with 
Google  Search.  This  control  of  the  top  of  the  customer  purchase  funnel  enables 
Google to act as  a  bottleneck,  by  e.g.,  diverting traffic from OTAs and MSEs into  its 
own vertical search products, to the detriment of OTAs and MSEs.  Indeed, Google has 
systematically engaged in such practices in order to promote its own vertical travel 
products, namely Hotel Finder (accommodation), Google Flights (flights) and VR finder 
(vacation rentals).  

5   Commission Decision of 27.6.2017 in case AT.39740 - Google Search (Shopping), C(2017) 4444 final, 

paragraphs 274-284.  

6   Commission Decision of 27.6.2017 in case AT.39740 - Google Search (Shopping), C(2017) 4444 final, 

paragraphs 286-296.  

4 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
For  instance,  when  a  user  searches  for  a  hotel  in  Brussels,  Google  automatically 
displays the “Hotel search unit”, a box with hotel listings that when clicked on leads 
the user to Google’s hotel vertical,7 see Figure 1. The Hotel search unit is prominently 
featured on Google’s SERP with a rich and attractive display format, setting it apart 
from  rival  verticals  displayed  significantly  further  down  the  page,  below  “the  fold”, 
despite the fact that these rivals are highly ranked organic results. Over the years, the 
Hotel  search  unit  has  captured  an  increasingly  large  portion  of  the  SERP,  pushing 
organic  results  ever  further  down  the  page  (and  below  the  fold).  If  the  search  is 
conducted  on  a  mobile  device  –  as  is  increasingly  the  case  –  where  screen  size  is 
limited, the Hotel search unit will typically push organic results down so far that the 
user will have to scroll down to find them. Yet the average user rarely scrolls down the 
SERP.  

Figure 1 

The result is that OTAs and MSEs receive increasingly less traffic from organic results. 
In order to make up for the loss of organic traffic, they have increased their ad spend 

7   As  far as  eu travel tech is aware,  Google  monetizes  its  Hotel search  unit  by displaying ads  within its 

vertical. 

5 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
with Google (either in the form of traditional Search Engine Marketing or in the form of 
Hotel  Ads),  which  in  turn  increases  their  cost  of  customer  acquisition,  increases 
distribution costs and squeezes their margins.8 

Even  when  a  user  clicks  on  a  listing  displayed  within  the  Hotel  search  unit,  Google 
interposes itself between the OTA or MSE whose listing is clicked on and its customers. 
When  a  user  clicks  on  a  listing  in  the  Hotel  search  unit  display  (see  Figure  1),  he  is 
referred  to  Google’s  Hotel  Finder  vertical,  not  to  the  OTA  or  MSE  whose  listing  he 
selected,  see  Figure  2.    The  user  then  inputs  her  search  details  into  Google’s  Hotel 
Finder  (e.g.,  dates,  star  rating,  budget,  services  such  as  Wi-Fi).  In  effect,  the  Hotel 
search  unit  that  is  displayed  on  the  SERP  (Figure  1)  is  a  “bait  and  switch”  –  the  user 
thinks  that  he  will  be  taken  to  the  listing  he  clicks  on,  but  in  fact,  regardless  of  the 
listing on which he clicks, he is taken to the Hotel Finder page (Figure 2).  

Figure 2 

Google  then  displays  the  offers  made  by  OTAs,  MSEs  and  hotels  that  have 
participated in the auction run by Google to populate its Hotel Finder results page, see 
Figure  3  (which  shows  the  screen  the  user  sees  when  it  clicks  on  one  of  the  hotels 
listed). Only then will the customer be able to choose an OTA or MSE to complete her 
booking. 

8   See  also  “A  Deep  Dive  Into  Google’s  Impact  on  Travel  2020”,  Skift,  February  2020,  available  at 

https://research.skift.com/report/a-deep-dive-into-googles-impact-on-travel-2020/, pages 37-38.  

6 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3 

Consumers  are  thus  pushed  further  down  Google’s  purchasing  funnel  before  they 
interact with the OTA or MSE that they initially chose back on the SERP. This reduces, if 
not eliminates, the ability of OTAs or MSEs to differentiate themselves other than on 
price (as only their logo appears next to a price), stifling innovation, disincentivizing 
investments  in  quality  enhancements  and  harming  consumers.9  At  the  same  time, 
OTAs  and  MSEs  have  to  pay  significant  amounts  to  be  displayed  in  Google’s  Hotel 
Finder results. In addition, to be able to participate in the Hotel Finder auction, OTAs 
and MSEs, hand over valuable data to Google, through a live feed, which Google uses 
to populate its Hotel Finder results.10 Google has not entered into contracts with tens 
of thousands of hotels and hotel chains in the way that OTAs have. 

As  one might  expect, Google has engaged in similar practices  to promote its  travel 
search products in other verticals, such as flights. Each time a user searches for flights 
on  Google  Search,  Google  will  by  default  display  its  own  “Flights  unit”,  which  when 

9   Worse, in the case of the recently launched flights carousel that appears above the Flights unit, OTAs and 

MSEs may differentiate only on the basis of their logos, as no prices are shown. 

10   This is a broader concern about Google, i.e. that it may collect through its various business-user services 
(e.g., advertising or analytics services) data not strictly necessary for the provision of its services, which 
it may then use to develop competing products. Businesses are in the dark as to what Google may do with 
the collected data and its standard terms and conditions shed little light.  

7 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
clicked on leads the user to Google’s dedicated flights vertical. As is the case with the 
Hotel search unit, the Flights unit occupies an increasingly large portion of the SERP 
and  pushes  organic  results  further  down  the  page  (below  the  fold),  while  its  rich 
display format makes it visually more attractive to users.11 See Figure 4, which shows 
the  results  a  Google  user  based  in  Brussels  sees  when  she  searches  for  flights  to 
London. 

Figure 4 

Importantly, in the case of flights search Google announced in January 2020 that it 
will  no  longer  charge  airlines  /  OTAs    referral  fees.12  It  is  hard  to  see  how  an 

11   This  is  in  stark  contrast  with  the  “neutral  display”  obligations  imposed  on  vendors  of  computerized 
reservation  systems  (CRS).  See  Regulation  (EC)  No  80/2009  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the 
Council of 14 January 2009 on a Code of Conduct for computerised reservation systems and repealing 
Council Regulation (EEC) No 2299/89, OJ L 35, 4.2.2009, pages 47–55. 

12   G. Sterling,  “Google removes  ‘ads’  and  ‘sponsored’ labels  from flight search results”, Search Engine 
Land,  23  January  2017,  available  at  https://searchengineland.com/google-removes-ads-and-sponsored-
labels-from-flight-search-results-327975. Flight search engines typically offer their services to consumers 
free  of  charge.  They  fund  their  operations  by  charging  participating  airlines  /  OTAs  each  time a  user 
clicks  on  one  of  their  offers  (on  a  Cost-Per-Click  basis)  or  completes  a  transaction  (on  a  Cost-Per-
Acquisition basis). 

8 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
independent flights search engine could compete against a product offered virtually 
for free to all sides of the market. eu travel tech suspects that Google most likely cross-
subsidizes Google Flights through its other products, and in particular Google Search 
and related advertising. Google may use the data it collects through Google Flights 
(e.g.,  people’s  travel  plans,  their  destination,  the  dates  on  which  they  travel,  the 
airports they will use, etc.) in order to sell high-value targeted ads on Google Search.  

As described in the academic literature, the ability to internally combine and use data 
across  products  and  services  may  enable  a  platform  like  Google  to  engage  in 
“envelopment”  strategies  aimed  at  conquering  new  markets  through  cross-
subsidization.  This  strategy  further  entrenches  Google’s  position  in  its  core  market 
(general search), while also preventing rivals in the flights search market from gaining 
data parity, let alone superiority.13 This strategy is simply impossible to match even for 
more efficient rivals in the flights search market, as it would require them at the same 
time to enter the general search market, where Google’s position is incontestable.  

In  summary,  Google’s  conduct  harms  innovation  as  we  have  seen  that  by  directing 
users to its vertical products (Hotel Finder, Google Flights, etc.), Google prevents OTAs 
or  MSEs  from  differentiating  themselves,  other  than  on  price,  or  even  from  earning 
revenue. This reduces competition and innovation, and harms consumer choice.  

IV. 

Why ex ante regulation? 

One  might  of  course  argue  that  the  issues  presented  above  should  be  addressed 
through  recourse  to  EU  competition  law.  However,  while  undoubtedly  an  important 
tool in preserving the contestability of markets, relying on competition law alone is no 
longer a sustainable solution.  

In  the  first  place,  ex post  enforcement  is  not  always  sufficient  to  tackle  anti-
competitive practices by Systemic Digital Platforms.14 Competition investigations are 
resource-intensive  and  lengthy,  spanning  several  years.  As  a  result,  by  the  time  an 
investigation has concluded, the market may have tipped in favor of the investigated 
undertaking as a result of its conduct, such that competition may be extremely hard 
to restore.15 

13   D.  Condorelli  and  J.  Padilla,  “Harnessing  Platform  Envelopment  Through  Privacy  Policy  Tying”,  14 

December 2019, available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3504025.  

14   See Competition and Markets Authority, “Online platforms and digital advertising”, Market study interim 
at 
(the 

report, 
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/media/5dfa0580ed915d0933009761/Interim_report.pdf 
“CMA Interim Report”), page 234. 

December 

available 

2019, 

18 

15   See also Report of the Digital Competition Expert Panel, “Unlocking digital competition”, March 2019, 
at 

available 

9 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
In the second place, competition investigations are ad hoc, limited to the facts of the 
particular case, and may do little to prevent similar conduct that has similar effects in 
other  markets.16  eu  travel  tech  members  learned  this  the  hard  way:  even  though 
certain members filed complaints with the Commission over Google’s conduct as early 
as  2012,  Google’s  conduct  worsened  and  continues  unchecked  today.  While  initially 
the  Commission  took  issue  with  Google  using  its  dominance  in  search  to  favor  a 
number  of  its  verticals,  including  travel,  it  eventually  only  addressed  one  of  the 
affected  verticals,  namely  comparison  shopping  services  in  the  case  AT.39740  – 
Google Search (Shopping).  In  the  meantime,  Google  has  been  free  to  engage  in 
abusive practices that are comparable to, and have created consumer harm of the 
order  of,  the  conduct  condemned  in Google Shopping in  order  to  favor  its  travel 
verticals.17 

In the third place, even when lengthy investigations conclude, the remedies imposed 
may do little to facilitate the restoration of competition. For example, rival comparison 
shopping  services  have  long  complained  that  the  remedy  implemented  in Google 
Shopping has had little to no impact.18 In November 2019, more than two years after 
the decision was adopted, Commissioner Vestager observed in an interview that the 
remedy generates “very little” traffic to rivals.19 In the case of Google Android,20 rival 
search  engine DuckDuckGo  recently  criticized  the proposed auction-based  remedy 
for  both  favoring  Google21  and  being  “rigged in favor of big companies and search 
engines with intentionally ad-heavy search results.”22 

https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/7855
47/unlocking_digital_competition_furman_review_web.pdf,  (the  “Furman    Report”)  paragraph  2.8  et 
seq; Stigler Report,  page 99. 

16   See also Furman Report, paragraph 2.20. 

17   For instance, in the case of Google Flights or Google Hotel Finder, there is a valid argument that Google 
has engaged in an unlawful tie of its travel vertical to its general search services. Once the user enters a 
travel-related query on Google Search, Google will automatically display its OneBox (e.g., Hotel search 
unit or Flights unit). There is no way for the user to access Google Search and avoid Google’s verticals.  
18   See  e.g.,  R.  Toplensky  and  M.  Acton,  “Google  antitrust  remedy  delivers  few  changes  for  rivals”, 
Financial Times, 27 October 2017, available at https://www.ft.com/content/b3779ef6-b974-11e7-8c12-
5661783e5589.  

19   N. Hirst and L. Croft, “Google's shopping remedy providing 'very little' traffic to rivals, EU's Vestager 

says”, MLex, 27 November 2019. 

20   Commission Decision of 18.7.2018 in Case AT.40099 – Google Android, C(2018) 4761 final. 

21   A. White, “Google’s App Choice Screen Still Favors Google, Rival Says”, Bloomberg, 28 January 2020, 
available  at  https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2020-01-28/google-rival-attacks-search-giant-s-
bid-to-stoke-android-choice.  

22   “Google's Android  choice  screen 'rigged' against some  search engines,  DuckDuckGo  says”,  MLex, 10 

March 2020. 

10 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Finally, there are circumstances where competitive entry may not be possible in the 
short- to medium-term as a result of the existence of insurmountable barriers to entry, 
in which case ex ante regulation may be the only available tool to prevent Systemic 
Digital Platforms from non-exploitative abuses of their market power.  

In light of the above, while eu travel tech supports the work done by DG Competition, 
intervention based on competition law alone many not be sufficient to address and 
deter anticompetitive conduct by Systemic Digital Platforms. Rather, we believe that 
existing ex post enforcement should be complemented by ex ante rules. Ex ante rules 
could  address  certain  limitations  of  antitrust  enforcement,  ensuring  EU  markets 
remain fair and contestable to the benefit of consumers. This view is shared by various 
Member States, including Germany and France, which are considering revising their 
competition law frameworks for the digital economy.  

Germany has been perhaps the most aggressive Member State to date. In January 
2020, the Ministry of Economic Affairs and Energy published a draft bill proposing to 
amend  the  German  Act  against  Restrictions  of  Competition 
(Gezetz  gegen 
Wettbewerbsbeschränkungen  or  “GWB”).23  Among  other  things,  the  draft  bill 
introduces the concept of “undertakings with paramount significance for competition 
across markets”,  and  provides  for  the  Bundeskartellamt  to  impose  additional 
obligations on such undertakings.  

More  recently,  the  French  Autorité  de  la  Concurrence  suggested  introducing  the 
concept  of  “structuring  digital  platforms”, 
i.e.  those  with  significant  market 
dominance.24 Last year, the competition authorities of Belgium, the Netherlands and 
Luxembourg also called for the introduction of ex ante instruments to enable them to 
remedy potential anti-competitive conduct in digital markets without conducting full-
scale investigations.25 

23   Referentenentwurf des Bundesministeriums für Wirtschaft und Energie, Entwurf eines Zehnten Gesetzes 
zur Änderung des Gesetzes gegen Wettbewerbsbeschränkungen für ein fokussiertes, proaktives und digi-
tales Wettbewerbsrecht 4.0 (GWB-Digitalisierungsgesetz), 24 January 2020 The draft bill is available (in 
German) 
https://www.bmwi.de/Redaktion/DE/Downloads/G/gwb-digitalisierungsgesetz-
referentenentwurf.pdf.  An  English  translation  of  the  key  proposals  can  be  found  at  https://www.d-
kart.de/wp-content/uploads/2020/02/GWB10-Engl-Translation-2020-02-21.pdf.  

at 

24   “The  Autorité  de  la  concurrence’s  contribution  to  the  debate  on  competition  policy  and  digital 
at 

challenges”, 
https://www.autoritedelaconcurrence.fr/sites/default/files/2020-
03/2020.03.02_contribution_adlc_enjeux_numeriques_vf_en.pdf  (the  “Autorité  de  la  concurrence 
position paper”).    

February 

available 

2020, 

19 

25   Joint  memorandum  of  the  Belgian,  Dutch  and  Luxembourg  competition  authorities  on challenges 
in  a  digital  world,  2  October  2019,  available  at 

faced  by  competition  authorities 
https://www.belgiancompetition.be/sites/default/files/content/download/files/bma_acm_cdlcl.joint_me
morandum_191002.pdf.  

11 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Given  these  developments,  and  the  resulting  risk  of  fragmentation  of  the  internal 
market  linked  with  the  multiplicity  of  initiatives  taken  at  the  national  level,  the  EU 
should  proactively  step  in  and  adopt  EU  ex ante  rules  ensuring  uniformity  and 
consistency in creating  a true (regulatory) level playing field across the Union.  

V. 

The legal basis for  ex ante regulation under EU law 

The  EU  could  adopt ex ante  regulation  to  ensure  the  fairness  and  contestability  of 
digital markets relying on either Article 114 TFEU or Article 103 TFEU. 

First, the EU should be able to rely on the general internal market legal basis of Article 
114  TFEU,  as  the  proposed  rules  would  have  as  their  object  “the establishment and 
functioning of the internal market.”  However,  this  would  require  that  the  (lengthy) 
ordinary legislative procedure be followed, with legislation being adopted jointly and 
on  an  equal  footing  by  the  Parliament  and  the  Council  on  a  proposal  from  the 
Commission (Article 289(1) TFEU). 

Alternatively, the Commission may choose to rely on Article 103 TFEU,26 which provides 
for the adoption of a Regulation or Directive “to give effect to the principles set out in 
Articles 101 and 102 […] laid down by the Council, on a proposal from the Commission 
and after consulting the European Parliament.” This  path  would  be  open  if  the 
proposed rules are designed to give effect to the “principles” laid down in Article 102 
TFEU:  the  rules  would  elaborate  on  the  long-recognized  “special  responsibility”  of  a 
dominant undertaking under Article 102 TFEU.27  

The benefit of Article 103 TFEU is that it enables legislation to be adopted on the basis 
of a  faster special  legislative procedure (see Article 289(2) TFEU),  with the Council of 
the European Union as the sole legislator. The European Parliament would only take 
part  in  a consultation procedure.28  Given  the  obvious  benefits  of  such  a  shorter 

26   Of the same view the Report “A new competition framework  for the digital” prepared by the Commission 
‘Competition Law 4.0’,  set up  by  the German Ministry  of Economic  Affairs  and Energy, available  at 
https://www.bmwi.de/Redaktion/EN/Publikationen/Wirtschaft/a-new-competition-framework-for-the-
digital-economy.pdf?__blob=publicationFile&v=3 (the “Competition Law 4.0 Report”), page 49.  
27   Judgment of the Court of 9 November 1983 in case 322/81, NV Nederlandsche Banden Industrie Michelin 

v Commission of the European Communities, ECLI identifier: ECLI:EU:C:1983:313. 

28   This means that the Commission will submit the proposal to the Council and the European Parliament. 
The  Parliament  may  accept,  reject  or  propose  amendments  to  the  legislative  proposal.  However,  the 
Council is not required to take into account the Parliament’s opinion – but it must not take a decision 
without  having  received  it.  If  the  Council  substantially  amends  the  Commission’s  proposal  after  the 
Parliament  has  given  its  opinion,  the  Parliament  must  be  reconsulted  (see  paragraph  40(iii)  of  the 
Framework Agreement on relations between the European Parliament and the European Commission). 

12 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
legislative  procedure,  eu  travel  tech  encourages  the  Commission  to  base  its 
legislative proposal on Article 103 TFEU. 

VI. 

Identifying the scope of the  ex ante regulation 

The most challenging issue is to delineate the scope of the proposed rules, i.e. identify 
the characteristics of the undertakings that should be subject to the ex ante rules. The 
goal  should  be  to  produce  a  workable  definition  that  is  neither  under-  nor  over-
inclusive, i.e. that captures those (but only those) undertakings whose systemic role in 
the digital economy is such that their conduct threatens the fairness and openness of 
EU  markets,  without  imposing  unnecessary  regulatory  burdens  on  other  market 
participants. The Commission should rely on abstract and objective criteria to define 
the scope of the regulation, as naming particular companies (e.g., the GAFAs) would 
not be realistic.  

In general, it seems there are two approaches that could be followed, each with its 
own pros and cons. One approach would be to lay down a “hard” definition, whereby 
certain  exhaustive  criteria  would  have  to  be  cumulatively  met  in  order  for  an 
undertaking to be subject to the ex ante rules. While theoretically providing certainty, 
this  approach  faces  the  challenge  of  correctly  formulating  the  various  criteria in 
abstracto.  A  second  approach  would  be  to  set  out  indicative  criteria,  which  the 
authority responsible for enforcing the rules would use to determine whether a given 
undertaking is subject to one or more of the rules. This approach provides flexibility 
but might create legal uncertainty.  

The terms of reference (“ToRs) of the “Platforms with Significant Network effects acting 
as Gatekeeper Impact Assessment Study” (the “Impact Assessment Study”) provides 
some indication of the  types of platform  that  could fall  within the scope of ex ante 
regulation.  We  agree  that  the  regulation  should  cover  “online platforms, i.e. digital 
services that facilitate interactions via the Internet between two or more distinct but 
interdependent sets of users”,29  including  “online marketplaces, app stores, search 
engines, social media and platforms for the collaborative economy.”30 

We also note that the ToRs identifies a series of features that could be used to identify 
the  online platforms that  would  be subject to ex ante  regulation, including the fact 
that: 

29   “Platforms with Significant Network effects acting as Gatekeeper Impact Assessment Study”, p. 1. 

30   Id. 

13 

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

They are “driven by strong economies of scale, and direct and indirect network 
effects  [and]  increasingly  act  as  private  gatekeepers  to  critical  online 
activities for an exceptionally large population of private and business users.”31 

Their “gatekeeper role is enabled inter alia by their hold over vast amounts of 
data and in some cases very large customer bases.”32 

They  enjoy  a  “systemic ability to cement and even expand their critical 
gatekeeping roles, including in other ecosystems, to raise barriers to entry and 
expansion for rivals and to increase their hold and leverage over their users.”33 

Their  “large competitive advantage due to the economies of scale and of 
scope, reinforced by data-driven network effects”  allows  them  “to act as 
private regulators setting the rules of the game on the markets they control.”34 

The ability to leverage their core abilities (data, customer base, technological 
assets, etc.) to enter and potentially conquer new markets with relative ease 
“may lead to unusually large commercial imbalances and bargaining power 
between platforms on the one hand and their users and rivals on the other.”35 

eu travel tech agrees that these features are what sets “Systemic Digital Platforms” 
apart from many other platforms that should not be subject to ex ante regulation, as 
problematic  conduct  by  such  other  platforms  can  be  dealt  with  using  competition 
law.  

On  the  basis  of  the  above,  we  think  a  workable  definition  would  be  that  a  digital 
platform is systemic if the following cumulative conditions are met: 

(a)  Its  activities  span  over  a  significant  part  of  the  EU  internal  market  and  are 
protected by high barriers to entry, such as economies of scale, and direct and 
indirect network effects; 

(b)  It acts as a private gatekeeper to critical online services for an exceptionally 
large  population  of  consumers,  which  single  home;  hence  allowing  it  to  act 
without constraint when it sets the rules of the game for the services it controls. 

31   Id., p. 3. 

32   Id. 

33   Id. 

34   Id., p. 2. 

35   Id., p. 4. 

14 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(c)  It  is  able  to  leverage  its  unique  assets  (data,  customer  base,  technological 

assets, etc.) into new markets and exclude rivals.  

The  first  condition  requires  that  ex ante  regulation  should  only  capture  digital 
platforms whose activities extends “across a significant part of the internal market”, 
hence avoiding local actors from being caught by ex ante regulation. It also requires 
that these online platforms be protected by high barriers to entry, enabling them to 
enjoy  significant  and  enduring  market  power  over  their  business  customers  and 
individual users.  

The  second  condition  requires  that  the  digital  platform  should  act  as  a  private 
gatekeepers,  so  that  one  user  group  depends  on  the  platform  in  order  to  reach  a 
significant  portion  of  another  user  group.  That  is  the  case  when  one  user  group 
(typically consumers) single-homes, to the effect that the other user group (typically 
businesses)  relies  on  each  platform  with  single-homing  consumers  to  reach  those 
single-homers.36  

Third,  this  position  can  also  enable  the  platform  to  control  access  to  users  in  an 
adjacent market (“gatekeeper” role), enabling it to charge a premium for such access 
(e.g., in the form of high fees or other onerous terms).37 They are also able to dictate 
their  rules  to  competitors  in  such  adjacent  markets,  which  are  dependent  on  their 
platforms  to  reach  consumers,  hence  acting  as  private  regulators.  This  reflects  the 
“horizontal”  or  “conglomerate”  nature  of  the  digital  platforms  in  question.  Indeed, 
there is a valid argument that the digital platforms posing most risk to competition are 
those that, by virtue of their systemic position, access to resources or competitively 
relevant  data  are  able  to  swiftly  and  effectively  expand  into  adjacent  or  related 
markets.  This  enables  the  digital  platform  to  rapidly  become  dominant  in  new 
markets,  while  at  the  same  time  entrenching  its  position  on  its  core(s)  market(s), 
reinforcing its gatekeeper role.38 

36   See also Autoriteit & Consument Market, “Market study into mobile app stores”, Report, 11 April 2019, 
available  at  https://www.acm.nl/sites/default/files/documents/market-study-into-mobile-app-stores.pdf, 
page 56, describing how single-homing of one user group enables the platform to become a bottleneck 
for  the  multi-homing  side:  “[s]ingle-homing  and  a  lack  of  switching  opportunities  mean  consumers 
cannot effectively be reached by the multi-homing side in  any other way, and the platform becomes a 
bottleneck for reaching the single-homers. According to economic theory, this means that the platform 
can  charge  the  multi-homing  side  a  premium  fee  for  accessing  the  single-homing  side,  once  it  has 
attracted a large single-homing group. If the single-homing users cannot be effectively reached by the 
multi-homing  side  in  any  other  way,  the  platform  will  become  a  bottleneck  for  reaching  the  single-
homers.” 

37   See also Autorité de la concurrence position paper, page 7; Crémer Report, pages 61-63. 

38   See also German draft bill to amend GWB, page 76: “such undertaking have in particular the ability to 
use their power and resources from other markets to restrict competition in additional markets, thereby 
strengthening  their  market  position  there  and  thus  ultimately  further  deepening  their  paramount 
significance for competition across markets.” (free translation from the original German).   

15 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A  second  approach  would  be  to,  instead  of  proposing  a  “hard”  definition  of  what 
constitutes a Systemic Digital Platform, list criteria on which the authority responsible 
for enforcing the rules would rely in order to classify the digital platform as systemic. 
The indicative criteria could be similar to the conditions put forward above as part of 
a definition. The authority enforcing the rules could thus have regard to the fact that 
the  platform  is  a  digital  gatekeeper,  which  can  act  as  a  private  regulator,  and 
leverage its market position into adjacent or other related markets, as well as other 
factors  (such  as  the  digital  platforms’  access  to  competitively  relevant  data,  its 
financial strength, etc.).39  

We  note in this respect that the  ToR of the Impact Assessment Study mentions that 
the authors of the study should elaborate a set of “mainly quantitative indicators (and 
underlying methodology for setting those) on the basis of platforms’ characteristics 
such as number of unique users, number of visits, the amount of gathered data, time 
spent on the platform, network effects and drivers of growth, main source of income, 
multi-platform  integration,  third  parties’  turn-over  realised  on  a  platform  or 
geographic coverage, number of transactions, etc.”  While  we  believe  that  these 
quantitative criteria may play a role in identifying the platforms that should be subject 
to ex ante regulation, they should be combined with the qualitative criteria suggested 
above. We do not think, for instance, that the time users spent on a platform or the 
number of visits it receives are, in and of themselves, particularly good indicators of 
the systemic nature of a platform.  

Regardless  of  the  approach  followed,  it  would  be  necessary  to  safeguard  legal 
certainty  for  market  participants.  For  this  reason,  we  think  the ex ante  rules  should 
apply to  a digital platform’s conduct only once the competent regulatory authority 
has issued a formal decision designating such platform to be “systemic”. That is in line 
with the proposals in the Furman Report (whereby the proposed Digital Markets Unit 
would have to first designate the companies holding “strategic market status”), and 
the  German  draft  bill  (whereby  the  Bundeskartellamt  would  have  to  first  issue  a 
decision declaring that an undertaking is of “paramount significance for competition 
across markets”).40 

If  the  Commission  were  to  take  this  approach,  it  would  have  to  consider  (1)  which 
authority would have competence to issue a decision declaring a digital platform to 

39   See  also  the German draft bill  to amend GWB,  which provides  that “[i]n  determining the paramount 
significance of an undertaking for competition across markets, particular account shall be taken of: 1. 
its dominant position on one or more markets, 2. its financial strength or its access to other resources, 3. 
its vertical integration and its activities on otherwise related markets, 4. its access to data relevant for 
competition, 5. the importance of its activities for third parties' access to supply and sales markets and 
its related influence on third parties' business activities.” 

40   See proposed Section 19a of the German draft bill to amend GWB. 

16 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
be “systemic”, (2) the effect of such a decision, (3) the geographical and (4) temporal 
scope  of  such  a  decision.  As  these  issues  are  closely  related  to  enforcement 
considerations, we address them in Part VIII below. 

VII. 

The content of ex ante regulation 

In this Part, we propose the principles that should apply to Systemic Digital Platforms 
in  order  to  ensure  the  fairness  and  contestability  of  EU  digital  markets.  Instead  of 
laying down highly detailed and prescriptive rules, the ex ante regulation should set 
out core principles, which are fleshed out in an accompanying guidance paper and 
further developed through the enforcement process.41  

The  principles  would  limit  or  prohibit  Systemic  Digital  Platforms  from  engaging  in 
conduct considered to be particularly harmful, such as self-preferencing or reducing 
interoperability with competing products or services. Of course, such practices may 
well be prohibited under Article 102 TFEU. However, given the potential for harm when 
such  Systemic  Digital  Platforms  engage  in  such  conduct, ex ante  regulation  would 
introduce  a  reversal  in  the  burden  of  proof,  whereby  such  practices  would  be 
presumed unlawful.42 It would then be for the Systemic Digital Platform to prove that 
its  conduct  does  not  have  adverse  effects  on  competition.  The  Systemic  Digital 
Platform should also have the right to provide an objective justification for its conduct 
or point to demonstrable efficiencies that are passed on to consumers that outweigh 
anti-competitive  effects.  That  would  ensure  that  ex  ante  regulation  does  not 
discourage pro-competitive practices. We now turn to particular practices that could 
be addressed with the ex ante rules. 

1.  Leveraging / Self-preferencing 

Many Systemic Digital Platforms seek to leverage their market power from one market 
into an adjacent or other related market.  

A particular type of vertical leveraging that should be regulated is self-preferencing 
by Systemic Digital Platforms, namely using market power in one market to favor their 
position in an adjacent or related market at the expense of their rivals, e.g., by giving 
preferential  treatment  to  their  own  products  and  services.43  There  is  growing 

41   Of the same view the CMA  with regard to a code of conduct for digital platforms. See CMA Interim 

Report, page 237. 

42   Of the same view the Crémer Report with regard to self-preferencing. See also ADLC position paper, 

page 8. 

43   According to the context, self-preference tactics may come in different shapes and forms, e.g., a systemic 
platform operating a search engine or an online marketplace may modify its ranking algorithm to give an 
advantage to its own products or services (e.g., in the form of a more prominent position in the results or 
a visually richer and more attractive format). 

17 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
consensus  that  self-preferencing  by  systemic  digital  platforms  may  be  harmful  for 
competition and should be circumscribed.44  

As observed above, one clear example of harmful self-preferencing is when Google 
places  its  “Hotel  search”  or  “Flights  search”  units  above  all  higher  ranked  organic 
search  results,  hence  discounting  organic  search  results  in  favor  of  its  own  travel 
products.  Users  will  be  drawn  to  these  Google  travel  products  not  because  they 
provide superior services, but because they are guaranteed a privileged position by 
Google  on  top  of  the  SERP.  These  products  are  prominently  featured  on  the  SERP 
because  Google  determine  where  its  page  placement  algorithm  displays  its  own 
vertical product relative to the organic results produced by its search engine, which it 
can  do  because  of  the  lack  of  competition.  In  this  case,  self-preferencing  hurts 
competition, innovation and consumer choice.  

This self-preferencing problem is further aggravated when organic search results are 
also discounted by advertising as organic search almost entirely disappears from the 
screen. This forces travel tech operators to buy expensive advertising, which – while 
being  extremely  profitable  to  Google  –  increases  their  cost  of  customer  acquisition 
and distribution, and squeezes their margins. 

In addition to pushing organic search results from the screen, Google is able to funnel 
traffic  to  its  own  vertical  search  product  through  a  “bait and switch”  mechanism, 
When a user clicks on a listing in the Hotel search unit display, the user thinks that he 
will be taken to the listing he clicks on, but in fact, regardless of the listing on which he 
clicks, he is taken to the Hotel Finder page, not to the listing he selected –The user then 
separately inputs her search details into Google’s Hotel Finder on this separate page 
(e.g., dates, star rating, budget, services such as Wi-Fi) for a new search. 
As long as Google is allowed to give preferential treatment to its own products on the 
SERP, as well as to load the top of the SERP with ads discounting organic traffic, market 
players such as the members of EU travel tech will have to spend more while getting 
less  traffic  and  conversion  on  its  ad  spend.  This  hurts  growth,  innovation  and 
consumer choice.  

2.  Limiting data cross-usage 

As explained above, the ability to internally combine and  use data across products 
and  services  may  enable  a  platform  like  Google  to  engage  in  “envelopment” 
strategies aimed at conquering new markets through cross-subsidization. This is, for 
instance, illustrated by the Google Flights service, which Google does not monetize by 
charging a fee, but by collecting data that it will monetize through search or display 
ads.  An  appropriate  response  would  be  to  place  strict  limitations  on  the  Systemic 

44   Crémer Report, pages 66-67; Furman Report, pages 60-61; CMA Interim Report, page 238; Competition 
Law 4.0 Report, pages 50-51; German draft bill to amend GWB, page 78; ADLC position paper, page 8. 

18 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Digital Platforms’ ability to combine and use data across products and services (“data 
unbundling”).  

In  the  alternative,  and  in  order  to  preserve  efficiencies  stemming  from  data  cross-
usage, the Systemic Digital Platforms could be prohibited from using data collected 
from one product or service in order to improve advertising for another product.45 That 
would be especially the case where the data is provided by business users for the sole 
purpose of servicing the business user’s advertising, but where the business user has 
no option to limit the ability of the Systemic Digital Platforms to use this data for other 
purposes.  

3. 

Impeding multi-homing 

Multi-homing has the potential to enable new entrants to build a sufficiently large user 
base  and  eventually  challenge  the  Systemic  Digital  Platform,  introducing  much-
needed  competition  “for”  the  market.  As  a  result,  measures  impeding  multi-homing 
entrench  the  Systemic  Digital  Platform’s  position  by  “locking  in”  users  and  erecting 
barriers  to  entry.  For  this  reason,  it  is  important  that  Systemic  Digital  Platforms  be 
prohibited  from  taking  measures  that  impede  multi-homing,  such  as  reducing  user 
data portability.46  

Depending on the case, it might be appropriate to require Systemic Digital Platforms 
to provide “real-time, potentially standardised, access” to data,47 in order to enable 
“personal data mobility”.48    

VIII. 

Enforcement considerations 

A  final,  but  equally  important  question,  is  which  regulatory  authority  should  be 
responsible  for  enforcing  the ex ante  rules.  This  is  addressed  in  this  Part,  alongside 
related enforcement considerations. 

45   Advertising  would  be  construed  broadly  to  include  all  fundamental  advertising  functions,  namely 

targeting, frequency capping, conversion measurement and attribution. 

46   Of the same view the authors of the Crémer Report, page 57 (“it is important to ensure that multi-homing 
is possible and that dominant platforms do not impede its practice”) and page 58 (“we feel that a measure 
by which a dominant firm impedes multi-homing is suspect and an efficiency defence would be needed”). 
See also German draft bill to amend GWB, according to which undertakings with paramount significance 
for  competition  across  markets  should  be  prohibited  from  making  the  interoperability  of  products  or 
services or data portability more difficult and thereby impending competition. 

47   Crémer Report, page 84. As the authors of the Crémer Report observe, data interoperability allows for 

complementary services to platforms to be developed and may also help multi-homing. 

48   Furman Report, pages 65-71. 

19 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
There seem in principle to be three options, namely (a) enforcement at the EU level, (b) 
enforcement at the national level and (c) a combination of both. Considering the need 
to  ensure  consistency  among  EU  Member  States  while  avoiding  overburdening  the 
Commission, a workable enforcement mechanism could differentiate between (1) the 
process of designating a digital platform as “systemic” and (2) enforcing the principles 
analyzed above in Part VI.  

1.  Designating a digital platform as “systemic” 

We  strongly  recommend  that  the  Commission  should  have exclusive  jurisdiction  to 
designate a digital platform as “systemic”. Empowering national authorities to declare 
digital platforms to be “systemic” would lead to considerable fragmentation across 
the EU. One could easily imagine a scenario in which one national authority declares 
a given pan-European platform to be systemic while other national authorities do not. 
In order to achieve consistency and legal certainty, the power to issue such decisions 
should lie exclusively with the Commission. 

The  effect  of  such  a  designation  should  be  that  the  Systemic  Digital  Platform  is 
automatically  subject  to  the ex ante  rules.49  When  issuing  the  decision  qualifying  a 
platform as “systemic”, the Commission should have the power to limit the scope of its 
obligations specifying that the platform should comply only with some of the ex ante 
rules, in order to better take into account the particular characteristics of the platform 
in question. The addressee of the decision should have of course the right to challenge 
the decision before the EU courts, but such relief should not have suspensory effect. 

The  geographic  scope  of  the  decision  should  reflect  the  EU-wide  jurisdiction  of  the 
Commission and the cross-border nature of the relevant Systemic Digital Platforms, 
i.e. it should cover all of the Member States in which the Systemic Digital Platform is 
active.  In  other  words,  the  designation  of  a  digital  platform  as  systemic  would  be 
“pan-European”,  unless  a  narrower  geographic  scope  is  explicitly  identified.  The 
Commission’s  decision  should  bind  national  authorities  –  including  national  courts, 
which  when  entertaining  doubts  about  the  legality  of  the  Commission’s  decision 
would  have  the  power  to  refer  the  matter  to  the  Court  of  Justice  for  a  preliminary 
ruling under Article 267 TFEU. 

Moreover, given that the Commission’s decision would be effective ex nunc (and not 
retroactively),  it  should  be  in  force  for  an  indefinite  period  of  time  (“once  systemic 
always  systemic”),  with  the  caveat  that  (a)  the  Commission  would  monitor  market 
developments and revisit (and if need be update) its decision periodically (e.g., every 
three  years)  and  (b)  the  addressee  would  have  the  right  to  ask  the  Commission  to 

49 

20 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
repeal  its  decision  for  the  future  pointing  to  exceptional  changes  in  market 
circumstances.  

2.  Enforcement of the ex ante rules 

Enforcement of the ex ante rules could be based on a system of parallel competences 
between  the  Commission  and  national  authorities,  drawing  inspiration  from  the 
mechanism  in  place  for  the  enforcement  of  EU  competition  law  according  to 
Regulation  1/2003.50  Under  this  mechanism,  competence  lies  with  the  authority  “well 
placed to act”.51 A Member State’s authority is typically “well placed to act” when there 
is “a material link between the infringement and the territory of [that] Member State”.52 
On  the  other  hand,  the  Commission  is  particularly  “well  placed  to  act”  if:  (a)  the 
practice has effects on competition in more than three Member States,53 (b) the case 
is  closely  linked  to  other  Community  provisions  which  may  be  exclusively  or  more 
effectively  applied  by  the  Commission,54  or  (c)  the  Community  interest  requires  the 
adoption of a Commission decision to develop Community competition policy when a 
new competition issue arises or to ensure effective enforcement.55  

Were similar principles to govern the enforcement of ex ante rules, we would typically 
expect the Commission to be  the authority “well placed to act”,  as the practices of 
large digital platforms are usually cross-border in nature and affect several Member 
States  at  once.  However,  it  cannot  be  excluded  that  in  certain  cases  national 

50   According to Article 11(1) of Regulation 1/2003, “[t]he Commission and the competition authorities of 
the Member State shall apply the Community competition rules in close cooperation”. Further details  on 
the  division  of  work  between  the  Commission  and  national  competition  authorities  (together,  the 
“European Competition Network” or “ECN”) are laid down in Commission Notice on cooperation within 
the Network of Competition Authorities (Text with EEA relevance), OJ C 101, 27.4.2004, pages 43–53 
(the “Cooperation Notice”). 

51   According to paragraph 6 of the Cooperation Notice, a case may be re-allocated where the authority that 
receives a complaint or initiates ex officio proceedings considers that is not “well placed to act” or where 
other  authorities  also  consider  themselves  “well  placed  to  act”.  Re-allocation  may  also  be  decided  if 
necessary “for an effective protection of competition and of the Community interest” (paragraph 7 of the 
Cooperation Notice).  

52   Paragraph 9 of the Cooperation Notice. Paragraph 8 lays down three cumulative conditions indicating the 
existence of such material link: (a) the agreement or practice has substantial direct actual or foreseeable 
effects on competition within the territory of an authority, is implemented within or originates from its 
territory, (b) the authority is able to effectively bring to an end the entire infringement, i.e. it can adopt a 
cease-and-desist order the effect of which will be sufficient to bring an end to the infringement and it can, 
where appropriate, sanction the infringement adequately and (c) the authority can gather, possibly with 
the assistance of other authorities, the evidence required to prove the infringement. 

53   Paragraph 14 of the Cooperation Notice. 

54   Paragraph 15 of the Cooperation Notice. [expedia: para 14] 

55   Ibid. 

21 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
authorities  would  be  “well  placed  to  act”,  e.g.,  because  the  practice  in  question  is 
implemented  only  in  one  Member  State  –  or  simply  because  the  Commission’s 
resources are limited. In that case, enforcement by the national authorities could work 
as follows: once a Systemic Digital Platform has been the subject of a decision by the 
Commission, national authorities could rely on the Commission’s decision and initiate 
proceedings  against  the  Systemic  Digital  Platform  for  breach  of  the ex ante  rules. 
Considering  the  proposed  reversal  of  the  burden  of  proof,  we  would  expect  the 
workload  of  the  national  authority  to  be  manageable  and  thus  decisions  to  be 
adopted swiftly.  

In any case, the competent authority – be it the Commission or national authorities – 
should be vested with the power to take all necessary measures to ensure the effet 
utile of the ex ante rules, lest we end up with toothless regulation. That would involve, 
in  particular,  (a)  broad  information-gathering  powers,  (b)  the  power  to  accept 
commitments proposed by the platform as well as (c) the power to order the platform 
to either refrain from a particular action or engage in specific affirmative conduct to 
ensure  compliance  with  the  rules,  on  pain  of  periodic  penalty,  and  appoint  a 
monitoring trustee. The power to impose restorative remedies, i.e. remedies aimed at 
restoring competition in the status quo ante should also be considered.56 

In addition, considering the fast-moving nature of digital markets and their tendency 
to  (irreversibly)  tip,  the  competent  authority  should  have  the  power  to  issue  interim 
measures aimed at preserving the status of competition, pending full examination of 
the  systemic platform’s  compliance with the ex ante rules.57 The Commission  should 
also  have the  power  to order  interim measures.  To this end,  the Commission  should 
adopt a threshold for interim measures that is lower than the one currently contained 
at  Article  8(1)  of    Regulation  1/2003,  which  requires  a  “prima facie”  finding  of 
infringement and an urgent need for interim measures to avert the risk of “serious and 
irreparable” damage to competition. Such lower threshold  could, for instance, require 
that the conduct in question is “likely” to infringe ex ante rules and may lead to “serious 
and immediate” damage to competition in a related market.58  

**** 

56   In favor of restorative remedies (remedies with a “restitutive” element) the authors of the Crémer Report, 

page 68. 

57   On the need to make greater use of interim measures and / or suggestions to lower the required threshold, 
see Furman Report, pages 104-105; ADLC position paper; Competition Law 4.0 Report, pages 71-73.  
58   This is the threshold under French law. See French Commercial Code, article L464-1; French Supreme 
Court, case No. 04-16.857 Neuf Telecom c/ France Telecom, 8  November  2005, Bulletin 2005 IV  No 
220. Note that the ADLC has made frequent use of interim measures.  

22 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
