Ref. Ares(2020)4722937 - 09/09/2020

SIGNATORIES 

Asociación Española de Plataformas 
Digitales de Alquiler Temporal (PAT) 

Deutscher Ferienhausverband e.V. (DFV) 

Digital Economy Network, z.s. (DEN) 

Syndicat des Professionnels de la Location 
Meublée (SPLM) 

Verband Deutscher Ferienhausagenturen 
(VDFA) 

Verband Internet Reisevertrieb e.V. (VIR) 

10 February 2020 

Commissioner for Competition M. Vestager 
European Commission 
margrethe-vestager-contact@ec.europa.eu  

AKENA Technologies 

Awaze Group 

Belita GmbH 

cc:    Olivier Guersent (Director-General DG Comp) 
Nicholas Banasevic (Head of Unit COMP.C.3)  

BestSearch Media GmbH 

Bungalow.Net Netherlands BV 

Re: 

Casamundo GmbH 

Chalet.nl B.V.  

dk-ferien Aps 

Our concerns about Google’s preferencing and 
tying of its new product Google Vacation Rentals 
within general search results pages 

eDreams ODIGEO Group 

Eiderstedter Immobilien Appartement-
Vermittlung Reisedienst GmbH 

Escapada Rural Servicios Para  
Propietarios S.L. 

EverStay Limited 

Expedia Group/HomeAway 

fejo.dk ApS 

FERIES S.r.l. 

Gites B.V.  

Holiday Home AG & Interholiday AG 

HomeToGo GmbH 

Istria home d.o.o. 

Location Bretagne GbR 

Location Vacances Express SAS 

Metatravel Service GmbH 

Naron d.o.o.  

Ostsee-Ferienhausvermietung Gosch  

Provacances ApS 

resido GmbH 

SARL VIVAWEB 

SARL Web Emeraude 

Silka Holiday Rentals bv 

TravelMeta GmbH 

Tripadvisor LLC  

Tripping GmbH  

Dear Commissioner Vestager, 

You were one of the first who correctly identified the 
competitive threats arising from digital platforms such as 
Google that act as both a referee and a player to “use that 
power to harm competition, by helping their own 
services”.1  

The undersigned trade associations and companies 
(hereinafter we) would like to make you aware of another 
case of self-favouring by Google. We are either providers of 
specialised vacation rental intermediation services or 
associations representing the interests of the Internet 
travel industry. The members include multi-national 
enterprises as well as medium and small sized businesses 
(SMBs) from around the globe. 

Akin to other sectors such as comparison shopping or 
online recruitment, we are currently witnessing an 
attempt, by Google, to expand its dominance in the 
markets for general search services into the separate 
markets for vacation rental intermediation services by 
favouring its own service in general search results pages.  

Vintage Spain Ltd  

Wimdu Meta GmbH 

1  

(in alphabetical order) 

Digital Summit, Dortmund, Germany, 29 October 2019. 

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
As officially announced on 5 October 2019,2 Google expanded its “search experience 
to include a wider assortment of vacation rental properties worldwide”.3 This means 
that Google started displaying vacation rentals from a variety of partners, some of 
which signed this letter. These offers for vacation rentals can be seen, searched for 
and compared within Google’s new product Google Vacation Rentals. With a few 
clicks the offers can then also be booked. Accordingly, Google advertises its new 
service as a tool to “[f]ind and book vacation rentals, with help from Google”.4  

The competition concerns arise from the fact that Google features its new product in 
a visually-rich OneBox at the top of its general search results pages – a ranking and 
display that Google reserves only for its own specialised search service. The 
prominent feature includes pictures, a map preview, ratings and prices – a user 
experience like any other vacation rentals search service. As the Commission 
established in its Google Search (Shopping) decision5, such favourable ranking and 
display secures Google’s service more user attention and clicks than any competing 
service may acquire, even if these are more relevant for the user’s search query. 

Google Vacation Rentals is a direct competitor to our specialised services. There may 
be some form of cooperation but ultimately both Google Vacation Rentals and our 
platforms compete on all fronts for the intermediation between vacation homes and 
holiday seekers. We all compete for the attention of the same users. We also all 
compete – sometimes on different levels of this market – for either original content 
providers such as property/channel managers or providers of vacation rentals such as 
home owners or real estate companies. But none of us Google rivals is capable of 
resorting to a favouring within the results pages of the standard Internet search 
engine to bundle these two user groups of consumers and properties. 

We see strong indications of a competitive strategy for Google to reduce us and our 
industry to mere content providers for the “one-stop-shop” of Google’s new product:  

2  

3  

4  
5  

See Schaal, Google Elevates Vacation Rentals With Hotel-Like Treatment in Search, 5 October 
2019 (https://skift.com/2019/10/05/google-elevates-vacation-rentals-with-hotel-like-treatment-in-search/). 
Google, The Keyword, Find and book vacation rentals, with help from Google, 26 March 2019 
(https://www.blog.google/products/flights-hotels/find-and-book-vacation-rentals-on-google/).  
Id. 
The 1st position on a given Google search results page usually attracts 32.5% of clicks, the 2nd 
position 17.6% of clicks, the 3rd position 11.4% and any further position attract 8.1% and less 
clicks (see https://www.wikiweb.com/google-ctr/). On mobile devices, this tendency is even stronger, 
with the top three results on average accounting for more than 70% of the total clicks, see the 
findings in Commission, Case AT.39740 – Google Search (Shopping), footnote 541. 

2 

 
  Technical tying: Google is technically tying its general search service, Google 
Search, with the distinct vacation rental search service, Google Vacation 
Rentals. Attracted and trapped by the visual prominence of the OneBox for 
this specialised service, users are induced to click on it irrespective of its 
quality and relevance. Users cannot use Google’s general search service 
anymore without also being displayed the results of Google Vacation Rentals 
when they enter a related search query. There is no option to obtain Google 
Search without Google Vacation Rentals. 

  Self-preferencing: Google is consistently positioning and displaying OneBoxes 
for its vacation rental search service above all competing services. This diverts 
the majority of the user attention and traffic to Google Vacation Rentals and 
away from its more relevant competitors. As a result, competing services are 
de facto cut-off from their customer base, at least from the majority of those 
consumers who only use Google Search to find their way round the Internet.  

  Anti-competitive foreclosure: Google’s conduct will have a massive 

detrimental effect on the industry. Due to Google’s general search service 
being the first port of call for most Internet users, almost all specialised search 
service providers are dependent on being findable in Google Search. By 
pushing, at no costs, its own service above those of its rivals in general search 
results pages, Google can convey its service an economic advantage that none 
of us can compete with or outbalance through other investments or 
innovations. Google is increasingly providing the relevant vacation rental 
intermediation service directly within its results pages. This will ultimately 
render any click through to a competing intermediation service unnecessary. 
These services will be reduced to mere content providers for Google’s rival 
service. This disables them from gathering the data required to enhance their 
search and matching algorithms, to identify user needs and to improve the 
user experience. 

To make matters worse, Google discriminates amongst competitors regarding a 
participating in Google Vacation Rentals: At the moment, only a few big companies 
have been approached by Google to share their content. Google argues that a lack of 
staff and technical issues do not allow to involve all businesses immediately. As a 
result, SMBs suffer twofold. They are excluded from the traffic generated by Google 
Vacation Rentals and the OneBox severely reduces the traffic from organic or paid 
search results to their sites. 

3 

We have witnessed the same conduct in the hotel intermediation industry and 
understand that this conduct may still be investigated by the Commission. However, 
our case has different dimensions. Firstly, Google operates a separate product in the 
national markets for vacation rental intermediation services. Secondly, in our 
markets Google’s abusive conduct just started. This allows the Commission to 
address the leveraging practice before it has irreversible effects. As you rightly 
pointed out in the past, in digital markets we “need to act quickly. Because, once a 
market has tipped, it becomes very hard to bring competition back to the market”.6  

  Google Search (Shopping)7 and the Microsoft (Tying)8 cases are strong 
precedents that may even allow the finding of a prima facie abuse. Most 
experts agree with the economic rationale of theses decisions. Not just the 
Commission’s advisory board encouraged more vigorous steps because “self-
preferencing by a dominant firm can be abusive even below [the threshold of 
essential facility] where it is not justified by a pro-competitive rationale and is 
likely to result in a leveraging of market power.”9 We do not see any pro-
competitive rationale in Google’s favouring and tying of Google Vacation 
Rentals. On the contrary, it restricts competition and will ultimately lead to 
less choice and higher prices for consumers.  

  Risk of irreversible “tipping” towards Google. As of today, Google does not 
charge its rivals for being included in Google Vacation Rentals. However, 
considering Google’s successive switches to paid-inclusions in the areas of 
shopping, flight and hotel searches, such payment system appears to be only 
a short matter of time. By then intermediaries, original content providers and 
vacation home owners will have become so dependent on Google’s broad and 
single-homing user base that they will have no option left but to bid their 
revenues away in auctions for paid-inclusions in the OneBoxes. In addition, 
already today the conduct strengthens Google’s dominance in general search. 

Considering the above, the undersigned strongly encourage the Commission to 
launch an investigation into Google’s favouring and tying of its service Google 
Vacation Rentals and to consider all possible steps to bring this conduct to an end.  

Sincerely, 

6  
7  
8  
9  

Speech, Digital Summit, Dortmund, Germany, 29 October 2019. 
Commission, Case AT.39740 – Google Search (Shopping). 
Commission, Cases AT.37792 – Microsoft I and AT.39530 – Microsoft II. 
Crémer/de Montjoye/Schweitzer, Competition policy for the digital era, April 2019, page 66. 

4 

 
Annex 

Google Vacation Rentals embedded on Google SERPs 

5 

 
 
 
 
 
Google Vacation Rentals OneBox 

on mobile (left) and desktop (right) 

6 

 
 
 
 
