New Competition Tool – Consultation 

Bertelsmann 

Bertelsmann SE & Co. KGaA (Bertelsmann) is a media, services and education company that 
operates in about 50 countries around the world. It includes the broadcasting and production 
company RTL Group, the trade book publisher Penguin Random House, the magazine pub-
lisher Gruner + Jahr, the music company BMG, the service provider arvato, the Bertelsmann 
Printing Group, the Bertelsmann Education Group, and the international network of funds Ber-
telsmann Investments. 

Bertelsmann is confronted with structural problems in a broad variety of digital markets where 
it is active. Through its divisions, Bertelsmann provides digital services in particular related to 
media products such as e-books, music, magazines, audiovisual entertainment and advertis-
ing services in a number of channels. 

Structural  risks  for  competition  in  digital  markets  result  from  network  effects,  economies  of 
scale,  single-homing  and  lock-in  effects.  This  applies  in  particular  to  markets  where  digital 
platforms are active and successful.  

A large user base of a digital platform leads to strong network effects and the accumulation of 
valuable and diverse data. This gives the platform the potential to leverage market power into 
new areas of activity (and become a competitor of their customers) and often times users/con-
sumers don’t have alternative services available and will eventually be locked-in with that dig-
ital platform. 

Digital platform markets have a strong tendency to “tip”, successful platforms can likely become 
gatekeepers and use their power gained for further monopolization. 

As experienced in the past, once the tipping point has been exceeded or a gatekeeping posi-
tion has been achieved, it is often too late to secure the remainder of competition on digital 
markets. Recent cases enforced under Art. 102 TFEU have proven that the development to-
wards  monopolization  cannot  be  stopped  after  tipping  or  gatekeeping,  inter  alia  due  to  the 
length of the proceedings and the reluctance to issue interim measures. Even during  those 
proceedings digital platforms can profitably grow further. 

Therefore, Bertelsmann definitely sees a need to complement Art. 101 and Art. 102 TFEU in 
digital platform markets:  

  On  the  one  hand  a  new  enforcement  tool  is  required  that  enables  the  authorities  to 
prevent  structurally  endangered  markets  from  a  foreseeable  tipping,  gatekeeping  or 
monopolization scenario.  

  On the other hand there is a need for other market participants (not operating a digital 
platform) to collaborate and join forces to be better able to compete with the large digital 
platforms (be it search engines, e-commerce platforms, social networks or other digital 
platforms). From a competition law perspective more flexibility in allowing cooperation 
will  be  required  and  parties  should  be  provided  with  more  legal  certainty,  e.g.  via  a 
general horizontal block exemption. 

Bertelsmann is aware that Competition tools will not stand-alone be sufficient to create a real 
level playing field in digital markets and therefore also refers to the Bertelsmann response on 
the open public consultation regarding the Digital Services Act package. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Bertelsmann does not see a need for another tool regarding monopolistic or oligopolistic struc-
tures  outside  of  digital  platform  markets.  Typical  oligopolistic  effects  can  sufficiently  be  ad-
dressed by merger control. 

For Bertelsmann digital platforms are not only intermediaries, distributors or e-commerce ser-
vice  providers,  but  also  competitors,  in  particular  in  advertising  markets  or  in  markets  they 
leverage their power into.  

Bertelsmann notices that third-party digital platforms act as closed ecosystems, which do not 
make the data available to media companies that is necessary for them to target advertising 
outside of the respective platform ecosystem. Digital platforms have more data about media 
companies' services than the companies themselves.  

In the marketing of digital content, technologies and methods for targeted and target group-
relevant  advertising  (“targeting”)  are  market  standard  and  form  a  business-critical  ability  of 
media companies in the context of refinancing content via the advertising market. There is no 
targeting on market level possible for media companies without access to cross-platform, con-
tent-related user and usage data. This also includes cases where digital platforms (technically) 
are in the exclusive position to obtain consent from the user for the usage of data. 

This also applies for Bertelsmann’s music activities. Digital platforms only grant limited access 
to data about how music is consumed via digital platforms and inhibit the ability of the creators, 
recording artists and songwriters, to reach and connect with their fan-bases. 

Also in the book business Bertelsmann does not have access to its individual consumer data 
via digital retail platforms, who do benefit from that information. 

Therefore, from a Bertelsmann perspective the main issues to be addressed by the New Com-
petition tool are: 

  Access to data, including consent management 
  Winner takes it all: economies of scale and tipping of markets 
  Gatekeeping 
  Network effects (both direct and indirect) 
  Leveraging into other markets 

Since the New Competition Tool only looks at market structure and does not refer to any mis-
conduct to be applicable, the tool requires some legal safeguards: 

 

It needs to be clearly defined, when the New Competition Tool shall be applicable. First, 
a determination of structurally critical situation is necessary. 

  Once determined, behavioral orders to limit the scope of action of certain platforms can 
be issued: e.g. prohibit self-preferencing , granting access to data, limit leveraging po-
tential 

  Only ultimately, structural remedies, e.g. divestitures, shall be possible. 

  A flexible system to issue interim measures is required to address issues before it is 

too late. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
