Ref. Ares(2020)4711846 - 09/09/2020

Prospects – Getting the DSA right 
These are the main conflict lines in the DSA debate: defining minimum obligations for all platforms 
which  apply  regardless  of  their  size  –  the  de  minimis  rule;  and  defining  additional  rules  for 
gatekeeping platforms – ex ante legislation – that will apply to giant platforms, whose access to data 
enables them to profile users and to influence opinion information online.  

Firstly,  there  are  concerns  about  the  risks  citizens  face  in  their  online  engagements  and  the 
protection  of  their  rights.  Tackling  these  risks  will  require  measures  that  increase  transparency 
about  how  platforms  moderate  content.  Content  moderation  is  a  standard  practice  among 
platforms  and  is  usually  achieved  via  automated  decision-making  (ADM)  tools  because  the  sheer 
abundance of information is impossible for human agents alone to process. Using ADM, platforms 
can  identify,  filter  or  remove  illegal  content  that  may  fall  under  a  certain  category  (e.g.  terrorist, 
child sexual abuse, racist and xenophobic hate speech). 

No  matter  how  beneficial this  practice  may  sound,  it  poses  serious  threats  to  fundamental  rights, 
such  as  freedom  of  expression  and  opinion.  ADM  tools  are  unable  to  understand  the  highly 
contextual and delicate nuances of speech. While ADM can potentially identify illegal content, it can 
also silence groups and individuals whose messages are not illegal. As a result, ADM can reinforce 
social biases, for example, by targeting the content of minorities and vulnerable social groups.1 This 
is why ADM tools must be made sufficiently transparent, so that independent observers can monitor 
and assess the different platforms’ ADM tools and decision-making criteria for content moderation.  

Additionally,  while  limited  liability  for  platforms  should,  in  principle,  be  preserved,  it  must  be 
reinforced  with  a  clause  that  addresses  the  Good  Samaritan  paradox,  and  introduce  additional 
responsibilities for the dominant players.  

Secondly,  there  are  competition  concerns  concerning  the  introduction  of  new  entrants  into  the 
market and the level playing field. These measures will likely be the focus of the ex ante rules that 
the Commission has mentioned in its DSA plans. They will be activated retrospectively when certain 
conditions  are fulfilled,  to curb  the  market  power of  giant  platforms  which  act  as  gatekeepers  for 
aspiring entrants. 

An  impact  assessment  of  dominant  players  in  the  market  will  be  needed  to  avoid  measures  that 
undermine consumer interests and innovation. Almost a million EU businesses sell their goods and 
services  via  major  online  platforms  nowadays,  and  more  than  50%  of  small  and  medium-sized 
enterprises sell their products through online marketplaces. With 4.7 million EU jobs currently linked 
to  businesses  active  on  online  platforms,  the  stakes  are  high  and  ineffective  measures  could 
exacerbate existing market distortions.2 

In this spirit, there are three recommendations the Commission should consider when drafting the 
DSA. 

Recommendation 1 – Introduce a double-incentive mechanism 
While  several  major  players  act  as  gatekeepers  of  the  industry,  there  also  smaller  online 
intermediaries. Therefore, the minimum transparency and market obligations of online platforms 
must  be  defined  according  to  indexes  of  annual  turnaround,  market  share,  user  base  and 
gatekeeping impact.  

Market  and  algorithmic  transparency  obligations  may  be  well-processed  by  market  giants  like 
Google,  Amazon,  Facebook  and  Apple  (GAFA).  However,  they  would  require  smaller  ones  to 
compromise on their capacity for innovation. That is why smaller platforms should not have to offer 

1 Birgit Stark and others, ‘Are Algorithms a Threat to Democracy? The Rise of Intermediaries: A Challenge for 
Public Discourse’ 
2 European Commission (2019), Online platforms: New European rules to improve fairness of online platforms 
trading practices. 

                                                      
exhaustive descriptions of their ADM and other processes, unless they are required on a spot-check 
basis. This measure could enable smaller players to enjoy considerable incentives  for entering the 
market.  

Conversely,  ex-ante  rules  should  disincentivise  especially  strong  players  from  abusing  their 
dominance in the market  and engaging in practices that make it impossible for other players to 
compete. Disincentives should involve merging and sharing user data across multiple services that 
are owned by the same platform (e.g. Facebook and its Instagram and WhatsApp).  

Data-merging  practices  offer  dominant  platforms  crucial  insights  about  purchasing  behaviour  and 
content consumption. In turn, these insights translate into ‘data power’ that gives unfair advantages 
to dominant players because it allows them to behave as gatekeepers.3 That is why ex ante rules for 
especially  strong  players  should  be  introduced,  forbidding  data-merging  practices  for  players  with 
excessive data power.  

An  effective  sanctioning  regime  will  be  necessary  in  cases  of  negligence.  It  should  enforce  fines 
proportional  to  the  damage  the  dominant  player  has  inflicted  to  the  market.  The  fines  should  be 
backdated  to  account  for  the  entire  period  of  market  abuse,  and  orders  to  stop  abusive  market 
behaviour should be enforced a soon as the threshold for adequate evidence is met – even prior to 
concluding the examination, which could take years 

Recommendation 2 – Establish a central EU agency 
A  central  EU  agency  that  monitors  and  enforces  the  DSA  is  necessary.  The  agency  would  have  a 
clear  legal  mandate  to  enforce  transparency  obligations  and  ex  ante  rules  for  especially  strong 
players acting as gatekeepers across the EU27.   

Equal  enforcement  of  the  DSA  across  the  Union  will  be  a  daunting  task.  National  enforcement 
agencies  should  not  engage  alone  in  enforcing  the  DSA  for  giant  platforms.  Besides  lacking  the 
necessary  resources,  this  approach  would  cause  fragmentation  in  the  EU  Single  Market,  through 
inconsistent  interpretation  of  rules  and  enforcement.  This  is  why  a  central  EU  agency  would 
harmonise governance between national and EU-level regulatory authorities by enforcing consistent 
regulation across the Union.  

The agency would increase EU leverage over giant platforms since it would represent the Union as a 
whole.  Additionally,  it  would  be  in  a  unique  position  to  address  potential  clashes  of  interest  in 
enforcement between the national and EU-levels of governance. For example, it could monitor the 
implementation of DSA transparency obligations by national enforcement bodies in member states 
where rule of law has been an issue. 

The agency should also enforce  a data  access  regime  in order to increase  transparency  over giant 
platforms in the EU27. This approach would enable independent ADM monitoring by  stakeholders 
(e.g.  civil  society,  journalists,  regulators,  academics)  and  foster  freedom  of  scientific  research  in 
platform governance. 

The  issues  of  democratic values  and  human  rights  are  hugely  important.  This  is  why  this  agency’s 
mandate should  be  designed  with  a view  to monitoring  issues  of content  governance,  algorithmic 
transparency,  and  discrimination  related  to  ADM  on  giant  platforms.4  To  minimise  the  risk  of 
overlaps,  tiered  regulation  should  explicitly  outline  different  levels  of  oversight  and  how  they 
interact with regulatory authorities in competition, data protection, cybersecurity, etc.  

3 O. Lynskey “Grappling with ‘Data Power’: Normative Nudges from Data Protection and Privacy” (2019) 20(1) 
Theoretical Inquiries in Law 189, 207-209.   
4 The Commission is also planning to present its European Democracy Action Plan (EDA) in 2020, which will 
also target issues of online disinformation and ADM discrimination on the basis of values enshrined in the EU 
fundamental rights. That is why potential synergies between the DSA and the EDA should be considered in 
advance. 

                                                      
Recommendation 3 – Enhance the role of national data protection authorities (DPAs) 
The  role  of  national  DPAs  should  be  enhanced  in  order  to  enable  them  to  effectively  enforce  the 
implementation of the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR, 2016/679) at the national level.  

There  are  currently  difficulties  in  implementing  the  GDPR  at  the  national  level  due  to  a  lack  of 
resources. A recent report shows that dominant platforms and services  can leverage DPAs’ lack of 
resources  in  individual  member  states.  For  example,  Ireland  and  Luxembourg  have  seen  resource 
increases of 169%  and 126%  between 2016  and 2019,  respectively. However,  there  are  significant 
disparities elsewhere: Greece and Bulgaria have seen a 15% and 14% decrease in staff, respectively.5  

Enhancing  the  capacities  of  DPAs  is  crucial  if  research  institutions,  civil  society  and  other 
stakeholders  are  to  safely  engage  in  independent  monitoring  of  ADM  practices.  Any  data  access 
regime  that  facilitates  independent  monitoring  should  come  with  strong  safeguards  for  personal 
data,  in  line  with  the  GDPR.  This  is  especially  important  when  it  comes  to  data  access  regimes 
operating  at  the  national  level  –  DPAs  should  have  adequate  resources  to  monitor  how  personal 
data is processed in these regimes. 

This  approach  would  alleviate  the  EU  agency’s  administrative  burden  of  processing  data  access 
requests from 27 member states. It would also foster harmony between national and supranational 
levels  of  governance,  as  it  would  maintain  a  meaningful  role  for  national  agencies.  Additionally, 
enhancing  the  role  of  DPAs  would  distribute  responsibility  across  different  levels  of  governance, 
which would reduce concerns about power grabs at the EU level.  

5 Massé, Estelle (2020), “Two years under the EU GDPR. An implementation progress report: State of play, 
analysis, and recommendations”, Brussels: Access Now. 

 
                                                      
