TUI Group Views – Digital Services Act Package   

Executive Summary  

Liability and platform responsibility 

TUI  supports  a  revision  of  the  liability  regime  under  the  e-Commerce  Directive,  in  light  of  the 
opportunity to develop a more differentiated system with legal clarity for all actors. We understand 
the ambition to expand transparency and due diligence requirements for platforms, but also warn of 
overburdening smaller operators.  

Ex-ante instrument 

TUI observes that specific market players have established themselves as gatekeeper in the EU 
online environment, by virtue of their large user bases, user lock-in and network effects (a.o.). This 
results in these players having rulemaking powers in some markets, limiting competition, innovation 
and consumer welfare. TUI believes that while the EU’s online travel and tourism market currently 
offers the many SMEs of the sector an opportunity to effectively reach customers, certain concerning 
developments regarding systemic operators and gatekeeping activities can be observed.  

In light of this, TUI underlines that only a very limited number of systemic operators should be 
regulated via the ex-ante instrument. Their status as systemic operator should be determined on the 
basis of network effects, user lock-in and a lack of available alternatives. Factors such as revenue 
and wide geographical coverage should not be used. A wide regulation of non-systemic platforms (as 
already pursued in the Platform-to-Business Regulation) should be avoided at all costs. 

With  this scope  in  mind,  practices such as  intra-platform self-preferencing  and  practices aimed  at 
excessive  user  lock-in  should  be  prohibited  for  systemic  operators,  while  mandatory  data  sharing 
obligation  and  interoperability  measures  should  be  instated,  so  that  all  platforms,  suppliers  and 
consumers are treated fairly online.  

New Competition Tool  

Complementing  the  ex-ante  instrument  and  the  existing  competition  policy  framework,  the  New 
Competition Tool should be developed as an instrument of inquiry and information gathering. It should 
not be equipped with additional powers to impose remedies, as this would lead to duplication and 
reduced legal clarity.  

It is our view that the Digital Services Act should set out a clear set our rules 
and frameworks for the digital (tourism)  economy for  the coming years. The 
rights and responsibilities and platforms, suppliers and users should further be 
clarified,  in  the  interest  of  maintaining  a  consumer-friendly  and  competitive 
environment for all actors. TUI remains committed to actively contributing to 
the  ongoing  regulatory  debate  surrounding  the  digital  travel  and  tourism 
economy.  

1 

TUI Group, 07 September 2020 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Introduction   

TUI Group is the world’s leading integrated tourism group operating in more than 100 destinations 
worldwide. The company is headquartered in Germany. TUI offers its 28 million customers integrated 
services from a single source. Apart from the expansion of its core business with hotels, cruises and 
destination activities, TUI is increasingly investing in digital platforms.  

In this context, TUI welcomes the opportunity to comment on the European Commission’s plans for a 
Digital Services Act package, which will define the EU’s Digital Single Market for the years to come. As 
the leading European tourism player and an established digital business, which is further expanding its 
platform  business  model,  we  are  responding  to  this  consultation  solely  based  on  our  extensive 
experience  and  observations  in  the  travel  &  leisure  market  and  its  connected  fields.  As  such,  all 
responses should be considered in light of this particular market, as TUI is not giving input on issues 
not directly related to its commercial activities. 

TUI welcomes the EU institutions’ ambitions regarding regulation and enforcement in the Digital Single 
Market. The tourism and leisure travel sectors have experienced fundamental changes as a result of 
ongoing digitalisation and resulting new business models over the past decade. Much of this change 
has been to the benefit of consumers and travelers, but also particularly the suppliers of the sectors 
(such as hotels), which are most often SMEs1. Nonetheless, the online tourism ecosystem has not been 
completely immune to the challenges of the wider digital economy regarding platform competition and 
abusive practices. It has become evident that a reconsideration of EU policy approaches to platform 
competition and the wider digital ecosystem is necessary.  

In light of this, TUI particularly supports a positive revision of the eCommerce-Directive of 20002, as 
its  provisions  are  no  longer  suitable  for  today’s  eCommerce  environment.  TUI  also  supports  the 
introduction of an additional regulatory instrument to ensure a level playing and fair competition in 
the Digital Single Market.  

Liability regime and platform responsibility  

TUI agrees with the prevailing view among digital economy stakeholders that the eCommerce Directive 
(eCD) and its fundamental principles have been crucial to the successful development of  the EU’s 
Digital Single Market and should not be challenged as such. The safe harbor principle and the concept 
of the ban on general monitoring obligations should thus be safeguarded in the revision of the eCD as 
part of the Digital Services Act.  

Nonetheless, TUI is of the view that legal clarifications are necessary to ensure a proper functioning 
of the Single Market and give greater legal certainty to established and newly arising business models. 

1 Ecorys, EASME, Study on the Contribution of Tourism to Local and Regional Development – Evidence from the 
European Structural and Investment Funds 2012-2018 (2020) 
2 Directive 2000/31/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 8 June 2000 on certain legal aspects of 
information society services, in particular electronic commerce, in the Internal Market 

2 

TUI Group, 07 September 2020 

 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
Art. 14 of the eCD, relating to liability (exemptions) for hosting providers, is of particular interest for 
tourism platforms, which (partially) rely on third-party content.  

In this context, the stipulations of Recital 42 of the eCD and its resulting legal interpretations should 
be  reconsidered.  Specifically,  the  binary  distinction  between  passive  and  active  hosts  should  be 
replaced with a more precise and gradual classification, based on the actual degree of knowledge and 
control of third party content. Here, TUI particularly argues for the possibility of retaining the liability 
exemption, while holding limited control over content, e.g. through basic editorial powers (supervision 
the  form  of  description  text,  but  not  the  included  information).  The  concept  of  knowledge  of 
falsehoods or illegality of the content is key, in our view. Conversely, a differentiation among different 
types of hosting providers should be approached cautiously, although an exclusion of hosting provider 
directly involved in the handling and provision of third party services/goods (such as large E-Commerce 
market places for goods) from the liability exemption may be beneficial.  

A revision as outlined above would enable online tourism operators to  conduct their business with 
legal clarity, while ensuring platforms are held liable where they have relevant degrees of knowledge 
and control over illegal content.  

An aspect to be carefully analyzed is the capacity of platforms of various sizes to adhere to the same 
rules. As  with  competition  of and on platforms under  the potential ex-ante  instrument,  it  may be 
worthwhile to contemplate a distinction of the degree of (legal) platform responsibility, based on very 
large  (systemic)  platforms’  ability  to  adhere  to  strict  regulations  with  relative  ease,  while  smaller 
competitors may struggle significantly.  

Regarding  an  potential  expansion  of  due  diligence  and  transparency  requirements  for  platform 
operators  in  the  context  of  the  Digital  Services  Act,  TUI  underlines  the  importance  of  avoiding 
overburdening administrative costs. In this respect, an asymmetric approach as outlined above may 
be suitable to avoid a consolidation of the market power of  very large digital businesses, based on 
their ability  to more easily  comply  with  regulatory  requirements  than smaller operators or market 
entrants.   

Ex-ante regulation of large platforms  

Our extensive experience tells us that in the EU online environment, certain players hold significant 
market power and may be judged to be performing a gatekeeping role also in the tourism sector, 
specifically in tourism advertising and marketing. Here, we see that even larger online operators in the 
tourism sector have developed a dependence on a very limited number of platforms in terms of their 
traffic in general, whether organic or paid (which is clearly reflected in their marketing and advertising 
spending).  

As such,  we are  witnessing  that  the  current  state  of  the  online  travel  advertising and  distribution 
market  is  characterized  by  strong  systemic  actors,  who  act  as  bottlenecks  for  all  economic 
operators  wishing  to  offer  tourism  services  online.  These  systemic  actors  oversee  entire 
integrated platform ecosystems, which do not only operate in adjacent, but also completely unrelated 
markets.  

3 

TUI Group, 07 September 2020 

 
 
 
 
 
In its most extreme form, we can observe how Google is able to leverage its search engine, consumer 
review channels, social media and app store to significantly strengthen its position as an unavoidable 
partner for online travel advertising and distribution. Returning to the concept of bottlenecks, we 
observe that most customers begin their holiday booking process on Google’s search engine. Google’s 
extremely strong position in the search engine and consumer reviews channels (a.o.) thus enables it 
to control the beginning of many booking processes, making an advertising/marketing relationship with 
Google not only vital, but indeed completely unavoidable for many online tourism operators. 

The situation regarding the online travel and tourism market itself may be much less clear-cut, as some 
research  points  to  a  relatively  competitive  landscape,  in  which  consumers  use  a  wide  variety  of 
platforms before making a booking decision. 3 Nonetheless, some may consider that certain large travel 
platforms are beginning  to exhibit  certain  characteristics  of systemic actors.  The situation  of  the 
online travel and tourism market should be closely appraised and considered in the drafting of 
the ex-ante regulatory instrument.  

In light of this, following are the factors which TUI considers to be relevant for the definition of 
gatekeeper/systemic actors in the online travel sector. These should not be cumulative in all cases, but 
regulators:  
rather 

assessment 

individual 

guide 

an 

by 

-  Significant barriers to entry: As identified in the Commission’s tender for a support study 
on platforms with significant network effects acting as gatekeeper, parts of the digital economy 
are  characterized  by  an  accumulation  of  a  critical  amount  of  users  and  data  by  certain 
operators.4 TUI considers this to be one of the defining characteristic of systemic actors, which 
render market entry  or scale-up of  competitors extremely  difficult,  by  virtue of  their large 
competitive advantage. This competitive advantage is a result of systemic actors’ economies 
of  scale,  with  their  cost  per  user  often  approaching  zero,  and  their  economies  of  scope, 
enabling them to gain efficiencies from offering several unrelated services.5 In the context of 
such market dynamics, data accumulation is a relevant element to take into account.  

-  Market power: Another key feature of systemic actors is, in line with the above description 
of economies of scope, their ability to leverage their market power in a specific market (e.g. 
search engines) into adjacent  or even unrelated markets  (e.g.  transportation meta-search). 
Such leveraging of market power interplays with other gatekeeper characteristics use  their 
significant data advantages over competitors and exclusionary practices to disrupt competition.  

-  Lock-in of users: In large parts of the digital economy, systemic actors prevent businesses 
and users from multi-homing through the use of tied products and technical barriers (a.o.). As 
“switching and  multi-homing  by  users  of  platforms  can  be  the antidote  to  strong  network 
effects”6, TUI deems it to be a decisive criterion for the definition of systemic actors. Locking-

3 Milward Brown Digital, Expedia Media Solutions, Traveler Attribution Study (2015) 
4 European Commission, Platforms with significant network effects acting as gatekeeper 
Impact assessment support study - VIGIE 2020/0630 under Framework contract SMART 2019/0024 Lot 1 (2020) 
5 Jacques Crémer, Yves-Alexandre de Montjoye, Heike Schweitzer, European Commission, Competition policy for the 
digital era (2019) 
6 Digital Competition Expert Panel, Jason Furman, Unlocking digital competition (2019) 

4 

TUI Group, 07 September 2020 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
in  users  and  businesses  is  a  crucial  element  of  systemic  actors’  ability  to  act  as  private 
regulators of the digital economy. In the online travel and tourism market, multi-homing of 
business  users  is  a  particularly  crucial  element,  as  it  enables  customers  and  businesses  to 
access a wide range of demand of supply and ensures increased independence from specific 
booking platforms.  

The factors outlined above allow systemic actors to play roles as unavoidable partners in a particular 
market and act as private regulators of the digital economy, to the detriment of users, suppliers 
and innovation.  

We deem to be the following factors not to be relevant for the definition of gatekeeper/systemic 
actors in the online travel sector:  

-  Accumulation of data: travel and accommodation platforms accumulate a significant amount 
of data and information on their customers. This data is highly valuable to all operators, as it 
serves to improve the services on offer (e.g. through targeted recommendations and the ability 
to provide the right information at the right time). In line with European and national data 
protection legislation, TUI also follows this approach by using collected data to significantly 
improve  a  range  of  services.  As  nearly  all  online  travel  and  tourism  platforms  accumulate 
significant data, it is spread among a range of operators small and large in size. It would be 
counterproductive and incorrect to define such data collection as a criterion for a gatekeeping 
role.  

-  Geographical scope: by their very nature, travel and accommodation platforms (regardless 
of  size)  operate  in  a  wide  geographical  scope.  This  is  not  an  indication  of  dominance  or 
gatekeeping in any way. We deem such a criterion to be completely inappropriate to determine 
gatekeeper status in this market.  

-  Share of market revenue: the market revenue created and impact on a particular sector may 
be  a  relevant  tool  to  determine  gatekeeper  status,  but  needs  much  clearer  delineation. 
Remedies  for  abusive  practices  in  the  context  of  market  dominant  positions  are  already 
covered in EU competition law and should not simply be duplicated here. The issue of market 
definition is also of significance, as already existing issues in defining digital markets should 
not be carried over to the ex-ante tool. Depending on the market definition, medium-sized 
platforms could be defined as systemic and thus overburdened with regulation. The approach 
to market definition should thus be cautious and trend towards a broad definition.   

-  Size  of  organisation:  we  deem  factors  related solely  to  the  size  of an  organisation  to  be 
completely inappropriate to determine whether an economic actor can be characterized as 
systemic. Considering the annual revenue generated may completely distort the image of the 
role of a particular operator, as these factors are often the result of unrelated (e.g. offline) 
activities.  In  general,  a  gatekeeper  cannot  simply  be  defined  by  its  size,  but  rather  by  its 
predominant influence over a significant share of users and the digital economy. 

5 

TUI Group, 07 September 2020 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
As with dominant companies under competition policy, an examination of the practices and abuses of 
systemic actors in the digital economy is necessary.  The main concerning practices related  to data 
usage and sharing surround established strategies by systemic operators to effect consumer lock-in 
and strengthen their network effects in an effort to significantly raise barriers of entry to any 
market and thus cement their dominant and gatekeeping position.  

An operator such as Google has succeeded in attracting a large number of single-homing users, also 
specifically  relating  to  the  travel  and  tourism  market.  Here,  the  dominance  of  Google’s  search 
engine is leveraged and incentivises users to utilise other Google services, including price comparison 
engines and customer review services, also through joint data usage and an effective integration of a 
variety of platform services.7 As a result of these practices, users often find themselves confronted 
with  significant  switching  costs  when  contemplating  a  multi-homing  approach  (e.g.  a  different 
search engine does not have the necessary data to make highly customized recommendations)8. These 
effects thus do not only affect competition in the single market (i.e. among search engines), but give 
an operator such as Google the necessary data advantage to aggressively enter an adjacent market, 
thus potentially also tipping it in its favour to the detriment of consumer choice and innovation. TUI 
observes that such a scenario is possible for the online travel and tourism market, in which the current 
range of metasearch engines and booking platforms may be pushed aside by an operator with such a 
significant single-homing user base, network effects and data advantage.  

TUI is generally of the view that the online travel and tourism market should be closely monitored 
regarding the practices outlined above and the influence of systemic actors. Specific concerning trends 
are  already  observable,  which  may  pose  a  risk  to  future  competition  in  this  particular  market. 
Specifically, certain corporates active in the online travel markets operate multiple metasearch 
and booking platforms under a single umbrella and may be able to leverage an integration of 
these platforms to their benefit, thus reducing competition and establishing significant network effects. 
In  this  case,  such  travel  platform  ecosystems  could  result  in  harmful  practices,  such  as  self-
preferencing of associated platforms. As already observed by the Commission in the Google Search 
(Shopping)  case9,  there  is  a  clear  incentive  for  gatekeeper  to  give  their  services  favourable 
ranking and display within search engines, to secure users’ attention and clicks. These practices could 
also be pursued by newly arising gatekeepers in the online travel and tourism market, meaning users 
would experience similar lock-ins and switching costs as is currently the case for Google, due to the 
possible integration and joint usage of customer data. In this context, TUI highlights the need for the 
responsible  authorities  to  closely  monitor  market  developments,  in  light  of  the  introduction  of  a 
possible ex-ante instrument.  

Nonetheless, TUI would like to underline that self-preferencing poses a major challenge only in 
markets dominated by systemic actors.10 In competitive and open markets, self-preferencing can 
be a legitimate and non-abusive business practice to increase efficiencies and recuperate the costs 

7 Australian Competition & Consumer Commission, Digital Platforms Inquiry (2019) 
8 Néstor Duch-Brown, Joint Research Centre, European Commission, The Competitive Landscape of Online Platforms 
(2017) 
9 Case AT.39740 Google Search (Shopping) 
10 Expert Group for the Observatory on the Online Platform Economy, European Commission, Progress Report - Work 
stream on Differentiated treatment (2020) 

6 

TUI Group, 07 September 2020 

 
 
 
 
                                                 
involved in establishing a prominent digital presence. As mentioned in the Special Advisers’ Report: 
“imposing  far-reaching  conduct  rules  on  all  platforms,  irrespective  of  market  power,  could  not  be 
justified, given that many types of conduct – including potentially self-preferencing – may have pro-
competitive effects”11. Further, a competitive market offers customers and suppliers the opportunity 
to switch to other platforms, should they be dissatisfied with their current provider’s business model. 
A general prohibition of self-preferencing should thus be strictly avoided, as it would impede 
the further digitalisation of the tourism sector by removing sensible incentives. 

To  effectively  remedy  the  outlined  issues  surrounding  systemic  actors  and  abusive  practices,  TUI 
suggests the following regulatory measures and obligations:  

-  Limitations  on  self-preferencing  and  differentiated  treatment:  it  is  clear  that  self-
preferencing of vertically integrated platforms can be a significant issue. While this topic has 
not yet reached the core of TUI’s business, it is evident that many players in the online travel 
and  tourism  market  are  already  heavily  affected  and  the  situation  is  likely  to  worsen,  as 
systemic operators extend their reach. A worrying example of this are the practices outlined 
in  the  complaint  lodged  with  Executive-Vice  President  Vestager  by  vacation  rental 
intermediation services in  February  2020.12  Additionally, such practices could pose an even 
more significant  challenge  for  the  online  travel and  tourism  market,  as  established  market 
players will further seek integration of their booking and metasearch services. Thus, it is crucial 
that a prohibition of intra-platform self-preferencing is considered as a regulatory tool to limit 
the influence of gatekeeper. Nonetheless, TUI is strictly opposed to a wider prohibition of self-
preferencing  practices  by  non-systemic  platforms,  as  these  offer  important  benefits  and 
incentives for the crucial digital transition of the tourism sector. 

In addition, when considering non-integrated intermediation platforms acting as gatekeeper, 
recommendation  biases  may  be  purposefully  introduced,  to  maximize  platform  profits  by 
preferring sellers which pay higher commissions, to give a concrete example.13 Such practices 
can result in very similar disadvantages for suppliers and customers as pure self-preferencing 
and should thus be treated similarly.  

-  Prohibition of practices aimed at excessive consumer lock-in: a further critical regulatory 
tool is a potential prohibition on practices aimed at excessive consumer lock-in, which seek to 
raise  the  costs of switching service providers.  This  is not  to suggest  that  consumer-lock  in 
should  be  prohibited  as  a  general  rule,  as  it  is  important  for  all  types  of  (non-systemic) 
platforms to give consumers incentives to stay within their ecosystem. Nonetheless, in the case 
of  gatekeeper,  excessive  consumer  lock-in  has  extremely  negative  effects  on  innovation, 
competition  and  consumer  choice,  as  it  makes  it  difficult  for  consumers  to  leave  the 

11 Jacques Crémer, Yves-Alexandre de Montjoye, Heike Schweitzer, European Commission, Competition policy for the 
digital era (2019) 
12 Trade associations and companies active in the short-term rental sector, Our concerns about Google’s preferencing and 
tying of its new product Google Vacation Rentals within general search results pages (2020) 
13 Expert Group for the Observatory on the Online Platform Economy, European Commission, Progress Report - Work 
stream on Differentiated treatment (2020) 

7 

TUI Group, 07 September 2020 

 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
gatekeeper’ ecosystem without losing significant functionality and convenience in the wider 
online market and environment.  

-  Obligation to instate ‘data silos’: to specifically tackle the issue of excessive data advantages 
by systemic actors being leveraged from one market to another, a so-called data silo rule would 
be a suitable remedy. This would mean that an operator overseeing a platform ecosystem 
would be obliged to instate a data silo structure, thus prohibiting the usage of specific datasets 
for certain business purposes.  

-  Data portability obligation: as much of the gatekeeper’ power revolves around and derives 
from user data, a data portability  obligation would be a  constructive  regulatory  tool. More 
specifically, an  obligation  to  reduce  user  lock-in  via  API solutions,  would  enable  travel and 
tourism consumers to easily and safely port their data to other platforms, in line with EU data 
protection  legislation.  Such  an  obligation  for  systemic  platforms  would  reduce  the  risk  of 
locking in users by lowering switching costs and thus also lowering barriers of entry for new 
market entrants.  

-  Data access obligation: the Commission should further seek to address the issue of systemic 
operators  leveraging a  dominant  position  in  one  market  to strengthen  their  position  in an 
adjacent  or  even  non-related  market,  by  using  the  significant  data  advantages  they  have 
accrued elsewhere. The economies of scale and scope involved are so large for these systemic 
operators that real competition can no longer occur in some instances and a regulatory remedy 
(beyond  EU  competition  law)  has  become  necessary  to  ensure  a  functioning  market  for 
consumers and competitors. This problem may be addressed via obligatory data access for 
gatekeeper’ competitors and users. As laid out in Executive Vice-President Vestager’s Special 
Advisers’ Report: “In order to enable formerly disadvantaged competitors to regain strength, 
it may (…) be necessary to give them access to the dominant platform’s competitively relevant 
data  resources”14.  For  the  travel  and  tourism  sector  specifically,  such  data  should  be 
commercially  relevant  to  act  as  a  remedy  (e.g.  data  related  to  search  terms,  consumer 
preference and the supply of touristic services). For tourism business users already partnering 
with systemic operators (e.g. in marketing), the possibility to export relevant datasets (incl. 
post-click and post-view data on paid advertisements) and allow for aggregation with third-
party data would be particularly useful, as this could allow a more accurate analysis of user 
booking journeys, to name an example.  

TUI believes that the outlined prohibitions and obligations should be comprehensively enumerated 
in  a  list  of  potential  remedies.  After  having  designated  a  platform  as  a  gatekeeper/systemic 
operator, the European Commission should then determine which regulatory tools are to be applied 
on a case-by-case basis.  

14 Jacques Crémer, Yves-Alexandre de Montjoye, Heike Schweitzer, European Commission, Competition policy for the 
digital era (2019) 

8 

TUI Group, 07 September 2020 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
As  the  business  models,  characteristics  and  specific  markets  of  gatekeeper  vary  widely,  the 
Commission should apply the possible remedies in a targeted manner, based on the gatekeeper’s 
abusive practices. As such, not all available options should be applied in all cases. Platforms should 
be able to provide a proper justification for their practices, which must be reviewed fairly in light of 
their impact on consumers, suppliers and other (business) customers before any decisions are taken 
regarding their status as gatekeeper. After decisions have been taken, full judicial review must also be 
available, in line with the application of EU competition law. Additionally, a periodical review of the 
gatekeeper designation and imposition of remedies must be mandatory.  

Consequently, TUI does support case-by-case remedies, although these should be based on a pre-
defined list of prohibitions and obligations, attached to a suitable regulatory procedure. We do not 
support  regulatory  intervention  with  remedies  which  have  not  been  specified  by  the  European 
legislator.  Following  this  approach,  regulators,  potential  gatekeeper  companies,  competitors  and 
consumers would have a reasonable degree of certainty regarding how the ex-ante regulation may 
affect  their  business  and  activities  in  the  digital  economy.  While  we  do  understand  the  desire  to 
implement highly targeted remedies for individual systemic operators, the procedure outlined above 
strikes a positive balance between individualised remedies and certainty for all involved actors. 

Considering the nature of systemic operators in the European digital economy and the potential ex-
ante  instrument’s  close  interaction  with  conventional  EU  competition  policy,  as  well  as  the  New 
Competition  Tool  (NCT),  TUI  is  of  the  view  that  enforcement  must  be  handled  by  a  single 
authority. In the interest of avoiding incoherent national enforcement and a resulting fragmentation 
of the Digital Single Market, DG Competition of the European Commission should be entrusted 
to enforce the novel rules under the ex-ante instrument. This approach would ensure a coherent 
application of the rules in the Digital Single Market, while also contributing to a coherent interpretation 
and interplay between applicable competition rules and the ex-ante instrument.  

An additional point of consideration is the overlap between the ex-ante instrument and the New 
Competition Tool. We see an imminent danger of significant overlap between these two instruments 
in  the  regulation  of  large  platforms,  which  could  create  legal  uncertainty  and  an  incoherence  in 
application. The Commission must very clearly define how the ex-ante regulatory framework and the 
New  Competition  Tool  will  interact  and  how  overlap  can  be  avoided.  In  this  context,  TUI  would 
support a stronger and more clearly defined role for the ex-ante instrument, which could be 
complemented  by  additional  market  investigation  powers  under  the  New  Competition  Tool 
(without the possibility to impose case-by-case remedies). In our view, the more distinct and clearly 
defined scope of the ex-ante instrument, focusing entirely on systemic operators, leads it to be 
more appropriate for the imposition of remedies in the interest of safeguarding competition in 
the Single Market.  

New Competition Tool 

In TUI’s view, the policy approaches to (digital) competition regulation under  the New Competition 
Tool and ex-ante instrument are closely interrelated and should be considered in this context. These 
instruments should be complementary in nature.  

9 

TUI Group, 07 September 2020 

 
 
 
 
 
As such, we believe that the New Competition Tool should serve as a market inquiry instrument, which 
enables the regulator to gather information through requests, inspections and expert consultations. 
Such  activity  should  support  and  complement  the  imposition  of  remedies  under  the  ex-ante 
instrument. The NCT should not allow for the imposition of remedies on market operators, whether 
structural, non-structural or of hybrid nature.  

This approach  to  the  NCT  would ensure a proper  function and  the  creation of  synergies between 
ordinary  competition policy  (focused  on dominant  operators),  the ex-ante instrument  (focused  on 
non-dominant operators in the traditional sense) and the NCT itself (focused on market inquiry), thus 
avoiding duplication and creating legal clarity, while further reinforcing regulators’ ability to ensure a 
competitive Single Market.  

Evaluation of policy options  

Digital Services Act Package: ex-ante regulatory instrument  

Option 1: Revise the horizontal framework set in the Platform-to-Business Regulation:  

TUI is strongly opposed  to  the  idea of revising  the P2BR as a method  to implement ex-ante 
regulatory tools for two reasons. Firstly, the P2BR has not been in force long enough to justify any 
revision. While the Commission states that “this revision of the Platform-to-Business Regulation would 
not  seek  to  review  the  current  provisions”,  any  alteration  of  the  Regulation  before  it  has  been 
evaluated  or  even  applied  for  a  significant  amount  of  time  would  be  counterproductive  and 
inconsistent with the principle of evidence-based policymaking. Secondly, the P2BR was devised as a 
horizontal regulatory instrument, providing for applicable rules and guidelines for all platforms in the 
Digital  Single  Market  and  thus  creating  a  solid  foundation  for  further  regulation.  This  stands  in 
fundamental opposition to the targeted nature of the possible ex-ante instrument, which would only 
affect  a  very  limited  number  of systemic  operators.  As such,  the  P2BR  and  ex-ante  instrument 
should be complementary and tackled in separate legal acts, rather than being integrated in a single 
revision. 

Option 2: Adopt a horizontal framework empowering regulators to collect information from 
large online platforms acting as gatekeeper:  

TUI is not fundamentally opposed to the measures outlined under this option, although this policy 
approach  would  clearly be lacking in ambition and  coherence. Such a lack of ambition  to properly 
regulate  the  worrying  practices  of  systemic  actors  in  the  digital  economy,  by  expanding  only 
transparency requirements and investigative powers of regulatory authorities, would not be sufficient 
to  address  the  problems  identified  in  the  Commission’s  Inception  Impact  Assessment.  A  lack  of 
coherence would be the result of the lack of clarity on how this policy approach would interact with 
existing  and  envisaged  investigative  powers  under  current  competition  policy  and  the  New 
Competition Tool.   

10 

TUI Group, 07 September 2020 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Option 3: Adopt a new and flexible ex-ante regulatory framework for large online platforms 
acting as gatekeeper:  

TUI is of the view that policy option 3 details the most comprehensive and matured policy approach 
presented in the IIA. We are generally positive towards this option, but underscore once more the 
need to define the scope of Regulation in a very limited manner. The respective criteria and scope 
should be established in close consideration of our comments above.  

TUI judges sub-option 3a to be very positive. As outlined above, a restriction of unfair practices by 
systemic actors would be a positive step, under the conditions outlined above. Nonetheless, care must 
be  taken  regarding  a  sectoral  approach  to  regulation,  as sectoral  legislation  is  often  already  quite 
significant.  

We can support option 3b in parts. It is evident that the concept of a ‘whitelist’ next to a prohibition 
of practices is necessary, in line with our comments on suggested obligations for systemic actors above. 
Nonetheless, these should be pre-defined in a detailed manner by the European legislator, so as to 
give consumers, suppliers and other online operators a clear and predictable legal framework.  

Digital Services Act Package: deepening the Internal Market and clarifying 
responsibilities for digital services 

Policy option 2 identified in the relevant Inception Impact Assessment is most aligned with TUI’s view 
on the necessary legal changes. Specifically, we support the ambition revise the liability framework for 
platforms,  in  line  with  our  comments  above.  We  would  like  to  highlight  that  the  approach  to 
transparency, reporting and auditing of algorithmic systems should be risk-based, focusing on the most 
problematic moderation and recommender systems. As such, common systems in use across many 
online  marketplaces  should  not  be  the  subject  of  such  regulatory  scrutiny.  TUI  fully  supports 
asymmetric obligations based on the type, size and risk of the digital service in question.  

11 

TUI Group, 07 September 2020 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
