Ref. Ares(2020)4713542 - 09/09/2020

September 2020 

Developers Alliance’s feedback to the public consultation on a New 

Competition Tool 

1. General considerations 

The technology industry represents an essential part of the economy today. Software

development and the consequent digital transformation have expanded exponentially,

permeating all other sectors. The challenges of the dynamic markets associated with this

expansion triggered regulators’ scrutiny, mainly with concerns about abuse of a dominant

position. Of particular note, digital markets exhibit an inherent network effect, where

natural competition (no anti-competitive behavior) tends to produce only one or two

companies of scale - until the next inevitable market disruption occurs. Competition

enforcement has already addressed concerns related to digital markets, including issues

invoked by the inception impact assessments for both proposals - ex-ante regulation, and

the New Competition Tool (NCT), respectively.  

We emphasize the need for a coherent and future-proof regulatory approach. European

entrepreneurs need a predictive and stable regulatory environment. The future

legislative proposals should respond to the objective of promoting competition,

innovation and consumer welfare.  

This position paper is complementary to our comments on ex-ante regulations for

online platforms, part of the response to the public consultation on the Digital Services

Act.  

Issues mentioned in the consultation that are specific to certain sub-sectors, specific

markets, or companies, call for targeted intervention. Ex-ante regulation doesn’t allow

for a sound intervention in these specific cases. Competition policy, instead, represents

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the best approach for these problems. A case-by-case assessment and intervention

against anti-competitive unilateral conduct should remain the solid basis for competition

enforcement. The NCT’s role would be to augment the toolbox and provide a more

insightful approach to digitally enabled dynamic markets.   

2. On structural competition problems 

The Commission seeks to gather information not only on the types of market

characteristics that may result in structural competition problems, but also “on gaps in

Articles 101 and 102 of the EU Treaty”. While we understand the rationale of the first

aim, we disagree with the latter. The new regulation setting up the NCT, with art. 103

and 114 of TFEU as its legal base, should “give effect to the principles set out in Articles

101 and 102”. There is no clear evidence, in our opinion, that the current framework is

not effective in addressing such issues. However, we observe the need to strengthen

antitrust enforcement by more effective organisational and procedural means to tackle

dynamic markets. 

There is no single feature that is particularly unique to the digital markets where

software developers are active. Some characteristics may be prevalent in digital

markets. In certain cases, a bundle of them may pose difficulties to competition

enforcement, as they require a more insightful assessment. 

Sections 6 and 7 of the questionnaire, listing market features and scenarios, present

false assumptions. The mere presence of one or more of these characteristics shouldn’t

serve as a “ready to make recipe” for intervention in a market, without establishing

anti-competitive unilateral conduct.  

As an illustrative example,

strong network effects don't necessarily impede

innovative

services

to

enter

the market,

and

recent

evolutions

in

the

videocommunications market prove it. There are relevant elements that contribute to

1

the success of a better product despite the presence of strong incumbents. The number

of users in a platform is not necessarily predictive of market power and network effects

1https://truthonthemarket.com/2019/04/24/what-zoom-can-tell-us-about-network-effects-and-competition
-policy-in-digital-markets/ 

2 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
​
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
are not always positive, but can be negative . Therefore, regulators should carefully

2

assess the impact of direct or indirect network effects and mind the possibility of

disruptive innovation. What might sound cliché, that competition is a click away,

reflects the reality of digital entrepreneurs, which are always alert for opportunity. Also,

assessing the network effects can prove a difficult exercise; an in-depth economic

analysis is recommended in order to avoid misunderstandings .  3

Furthermore, the assumption that “customers typically use one platform (i.e. they

predominantly

single-home

) and cannot easily switch” is incorrect. Usually a faithful

user base indicates that the online platform or the digital product or service is satisfying

certain needs and offering a user experience that other products don’t. There are areas

where consumers prefer single-home, (for reasons of cost or convenience), but in other

areas,

like social networks, multi-homing is widespread. Single-homing cannot be

considered as problematic in itself and definitely cannot (at least alone) indicate a

structural problem in the market. In this context, the gatekeeper scenarios, as

described in section 7 - “situations where customers typically predominantly use one

service provider/platform (single-home) and therefore the market dynamics are only

determined by the gatekeeper” doesn’t make sense.  

Another relevant example of a false assumption is the “

zero-pricing

” characteristic.

Ad-based business models that offer free or low-price access to different online

products and services, brought enormous benefits for their customers and allowed

many startups and innovative small companies to thrive. Software developers, in

particular, have capitalized on such business models, which have driven various media

industries for over 100 years. The free and freemium price-models are the prevailing

choice for mobile app developers, giving them the opportunity to reach an audience

which is not open to pay for a new and unknown product, and also to put in place

efficient marketing at a low cost to grow their user base and achieve scale. Moreover,

the zero-price environment makes multi-homing easier. 

All

listed scenarios can represent “a source or part of the reasons for a structural

competition problem”, but at present, apart from regulatory barriers, we don’t perceive

2 
3 
https://ssrn.com/abstract=3215488

http://sites.bu.edu/tpri/files/2018/07/tucker-network-effects-antitrust2018.pdf 
Varian, Hal R., Use and Abuse of Network Effects (September 17, 2017) 
 or 

http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3215488 

3 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
​
​
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
​
​
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
​
​
​
​
 
any of them as problematic for the markets relevant for software developers. Articles

101 and 102 of the EU Treaty are suitable and sufficiently effective to address those

market situations, excepting the above mentioned regulatory barriers which need to be

further tackled by EU and national regulators.  

The regulatory barriers are related to the persistent fragmentation of the Single

Market, especially in areas such as data protection and privacy, content regulation and

services. These are discouraging ambitious entrepreneurs to start or keep their

businesses in the EU. Even large online platforms struggle with 27 different compliance

policies. We are looking forward to the revision of the e-Commerce Directive which

offers the opportunity for harmonized rules and more legal clarity. We remain

concerned nevertheless of the unintended effects of the data protection and privacy

regulations and announced regulatory initiatives (such as on artificial

intelligence).

Interference between competition policy and other policies is also an issue of concern. 

With regard to

algorithmic collusion

, Article 101 remains a solid legal base for

tackling all scenarios where algorithmic pricing can raise competition issues. More

research in this area is needed,

in order

to better understand the possible

consequences of the behaviour of pricing algorithms . One could observe lately valuable

4

analysis related to new types of collusion (e.g. blockchain-based collusion, particularly

when it involves the use of smart contracts)  5

We recommend caution in an early intervention in “

tipping markets

”. This could have

many unintended consequences, as the impact of remedies could drastically change the

course of those markets. Digital markets are naturally prone to tipping, but inherently

transient. It is also difficult to see tipping risks as inevitably negative in many digital

services markets, as there are various offers co-existing and competing, and the point

where scale builds is often driven by accelerating efficiencies and consumer benefits.

Product differentiation is key in having a competitive advantage and all companies, big

or small, are striving to offer the highest quality, solutions and functionalities, design

and user experience, and customer services. The differentiation relies on hard work and

innovation rather than on scale.  

https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3304991 

4 
5https://jolt.law.harvard.edu/digest/the-fundamental-unimportance-of-algorithmic-collusion-for-antitrust-la
w

https://thibaultschrepel.com/en/publications/ 

; 

4 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
​
​
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
​
​
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
​
​
​
 
Tipping markets should not be considered an a priori problem, as they are inevitable for

many digital segments, with or without intervention. Of course, intervention is required

when a firm is strengthening its market position through exclusionary behaviour, and

Article 102 serves its purpose well. Nevertheless, we acknowledge that the NCT could

serve as an instrument of vigilance for tipping markets with players that are not

dominant within the meaning of Article 101 and 102. It would not only allow an

insightful understanding of the market dynamics, but also would help in finding the

appropriate remedies when intervention is found to be necessary. 

In both consultations, the notion of “

gatekeeper

” is unclear. According to section 18, it

comprises the following elements: 

- access to a high number of customers 

-

-

single-homing 

“business operators need to accept the conditions of competition of the platform

- including its business environment - to reach the customers that use the

specific platform” 

- may not necessarily be ‘dominant’ within the meaning of Article 102 of the EU

Treaty, 

and raise the following concerns: 

-

-

-

“Gatekeepers

determine

the

dynamics

of

competition

on

the

aftermarket/platform”  

“As customers/users cannot easily switch, they have to accept the competitive

environment on the aftermarket /platform”  

“Business operators can only reach the customers that use the specific

platform/aftermarket by adapting their business model and accepting their terms

and conditions”. 

These elements cannot serve as a criteria for such significant interventions leading to

ex-ante remedies, or more problematic, ex-ante regulation. We are concerned by the

lack of legal accuracy (what represents a “high number of customers”?) and false

assumptions (see the above comments about multi-homing). 

As a further matter, there could be a structural problem if online platforms wouldn’t

control their business environment and set out uniform rules and guidelines for their

customers, business users and/or consumers. This is valid also for offline marketplaces.

5 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
​
​
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Any disproportionate behaviour would automatically trigger customers disapproval and

will ultimately force the online platform to respond to their complaints, to minimise the

risk of losing customers or provide an opening for a disruptor.  

The EU Regulation 2019/1150 on platform-to-business relations (‘P2B

Regulation’), which started to apply as from 12 July 2020, provides important rules for

online platforms' ecosystems. The transparency requirements represent an insightful

tool

for business users and consumers, but also for

relevant authorities (e.g.

competition authorities) to understand the outcome of certain mechanisms/processes,

like ranking. At the same time, increased transparency obliges online platforms to

enhance their awareness of the needs of their users. The regulation also sets important

obligations for online intermediaries services intended to ensure fair commercial

practices (e.g. notice periods, specific contractual terms, internal complaint systems).

The current framework under Article 102 is suitable to address problematic unilateral

conduct in the situation of a dominant position involving such scenarios.  

It is impossible to draw a one-size-fits-all solution, a general definition of

“gatekeeper”. Instead, the NCT should focus on an efficient case-by-case

assessment, on the exercise of market power by dominant and non-dominant

market players, without imposing a disproportionate and illegitimate standard.

In this regard, we recognize the merits of the NCT’s scrutiny role compared to

an unfitting regulatory framework.   

3. On policy options and the institutional set-up of a new competition tool 

As mentioned in the general remarks, the NCT should enhance the enforcement

toolbox, allowing a more in-depth assessment and flexible ex-ante approach when

tackling digitally enabled dynamic markets.  

We emphasized in our feedback to the Inception Impact Assessment that the NCT

6

should not be used to distort markets on purpose, according to an industrial policy

agenda. The proposed options raise legitimate concerns related to a discretionary

approach and the significant impact of the outcomes (if remedies are to be imposed).

6https://ec.europa.eu/info/law/better-regulation/have-your-say/initiatives/12416-New-competition-tool/F5
35300 

6 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The irreversible path that the NCT could lay down calls for extreme caution and a

7

rigorous impact assessment.   

An ex-ante intervention could be effective if it is principles-based, hence future proof,

tailored to the specific situations arising in each market. In this sense, an approach in

the form of a code of conduct, would provide principle-based solutions and useful

flexibility to encourage companies to adjust their behaviour. Codes of conduct should

involve all affected players participating in the market under scrutiny. This approach,

recommended by the UK Report of the Digital Competition Expert Panel , could be

8

complemented by specific ex ante-guidance for digital and other fast-moving markets,

as proposed by the Joint Memorandum of the Benelux competition authorities . 9

NCT should have a broad scope, and not be limited to digital markets.

The rapid

pace of digitisation is transforming many economic sectors and the limits of digital

markets are increasingly difficult to delimit. 

There are some 

critical aspects

 to consider when designing the framework for NCT: 

● risks of overlapping with ex-ante regulation and enforcement based on Articles

101 and 102 TFEU, the current sector enquiry regime, but also with regulatory

and competition interventions at national level. There is a strong need for clear

boundaries in order to avoid legal uncertainty.  

● risk of derogating from the fundamental principles established by the Treaty and

the relevant jurisprudence of the European Courts. The new tool should enhance

antitrust enforcement, not set out new competition rules. 

● ensuring the proportionality of intervention and a sound legal test. The legal

framework for NCT should provide an evidence based approach, with appropriate

checks and balances and adequate procedural safeguards, including full rights of

defence and judicial review. Relevant case-law could guide the evidentiary

standards and burdens of proof. 

7https://chillingcompetition.com/2020/06/11/can-this-be-the-new-normal-10-questions-on-the-proposed-n
ew-competition-tool/ 
8https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/78554
7/unlocking_digital_competition_furman_review_web.pdf 
9https://www.belgiancompetition.be/en/about-us/publications/joint-memorandum-belgian-dutch-and-luxe
mbourg-competition-authorities 

7 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
​
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
​
​
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
● a

cautious approach in imposing remedies,

in order to avoid unintended

consequences, especially for smaller players. The significant impact of remedies

based on rebuttable presumptions, without finding an infringement, can act as a

disincentive to invest .  

10

It is crucial that

all the concerned participants in the markets be able to provide

their input during the proceedings. Early intervention in a market requires a

delicate touch and should strictly pursue the objective of ensuring a climate of fair

competition. If all market participants are involved, it is easier to avoid unintended

consequences, based on a deep understanding of the dynamics of that particular

market and solid empirical evidence. 

The NCT should be also an instrument of

enforcement cohesion within the Single

Market. The new enforcement procedures should have the central presence of DG

COMP, supported by enhanced cooperation with and between Member States

competition authorities and other national authorities (especially on data protection and

consumer protection). 

A hasty intervention on digital markets could have a chilling effect on entrepreneurship

and innovation in the EU. It is almost impossible to predict market evolution or

technological transformations and the competition policy should stay anchored in its

fundamental principles instead of engaging on a speculative path .  

11

Therefore we see the NCT as a flexible and agile tool for participative antitrust, more

suitable for ex-ante scrutiny than a rigid approach through ex-ante regulation, which

risks to set a Procrustean bed for European digital markets.  

10“(...)the imposition of potentially far reaching remedies without finding an infringement raises questions 
as to the legitimacy, proportionality, and effectiveness of such remedies as well as to the potential to 
undermine incentives to invest.” 
https://www.covcompetition.com/2020/06/the-new-normal-eu-commission-prepares-a-new-competition-e
nforcement-tool-aiming-at-structural-competition-concerns
11https://www.cato.org/publications/policy-analysis/time-different-schumpeter-tech-giants-monopoly-fatali
sm 

/ 

8 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
​
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
​
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
​
