Position Paper 
7 September 2020 

Commission consultation on a New Competition Tool 

Key messages 

EuroCommerce shares the Commission’s aim of ensuring that markets remain open and contestable 
for innovators, businesses, and new market entrants. Markets, and in particular digital markets, are 
developing  fast  and  are  expected  to  continue  to  do  so,  with  new  services  and  business  models 
constantly emerging. It is therefore critical that any possible policy intervention aimed at addressing 
certain business practices or models does not unintentionally stifle innovation or the dynamism on 
the market and thus undermine the ability and incentives of European players to grow and compete. 

To remain competitive and grow, retailers and wholesalers need a regulatory framework that provides 
legal certainty and a level playing field and gives incentives to develop their businesses online as well 
as offline. We ask the Commission to take these factors into account when conducting their impact 
assessments.   

We wish to make the following main points, which we will detail further below: 

1.  We  are,  not  convinced  that  a  New  Competition  Tool  would  contribute  to  creating  such  a 
framework. Rather, we are concerned that this would represent a fundamental change in how 
markets are assessed, and competition policy enforced, by focusing on market structures rather 
than on infringements. We would ask the Commission to provide a much clearer justification for 
the development of a completely new tool, in any of the forms proposed. 

2.  A new tool allowing the imposition of remedies without a finding of infringement could lead to 
a disproportionate interference in the market economy and have a chilling effect on innovation, 
growth and investment. 

3. 

In  our  opinion,  Articles  101  and  102  TFEU  and  the  related  EU  competition  law  tools  are 
sufficiently flexible to catch all new forms of conduct that pose a threat to competition and the 
competition rules  toolbox  is under  review, in particular to adapt  it  to digital  developments.  In 
addition, the Commission has the ability to undertake sector inquiries and regulate in cases of 
market failure. 

4.  We  are  also  not  convinced,  that  the  legal  basis  proposed  by  the  Commission  is  appropriate. 

Neither Art. 103 TFEU nor Art. 114 seem to be an appropriate legal basis.  

5.  We  would  welcome  more  detail  on  how  the  suggested  approach  could  contribute  to  more 
competitive and innovative markets and consumer welfare. We also ask whether the same results 
could not be achieved by adapting some of the existing competition law toolbox through the 
ongoing review or by exploring self-regulatory instruments; and whether experience from other 
sectors can provide examples of successful alternative approaches. 

6. 

If  the  Commission  pursues  this  new  tool  we  underline  the  importance  of  imposing  proper 
safeguards  and  due  process,  and  would  recommend  to  limits  its  application  to  areas  where 
competition problems have been observed that cannot be solved by more proportionate means 
and  have  an  appreciable  effect  on  trade  between  EU  member  states  that  is  not  limited  to 
national  or  regional  markets  within  one  member  state.  Furthermore,  the  relationship  with 
Art.101 and 102 would need to be clarified. 

••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••• 

www.eurocommerce.eu 

 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1.  Legal basis 

2.  Art. 103 TFEU does not seem to be an appropriate legal basis. The scope of the authorisation to 
the Council to adopt all appropriate regulations and directives is determined by the content of 
Articles 101 and 102 TFEU. Regulations or directives must serve to implement these provisions 
but may neither amend nor supplement them. Art. 102 TFEU, for example, as interpreted by the 
ECJ in the Continental Can case (ECJ, Case C-6/72), prohibits a merger as abusive only if it leads to 
a strengthening of an already existing dominant position, but not if it first creates  a dominant 
position. In this respect, it is highly doubtful whether the options which link remedies neither to 
an infringement of competition law nor to a dominant position can be based on Article 103 TFEU. 

3.  Art.  114  TFEU  will  in  all  likelihood  not  be  considered  as  a  supplementary  legal  basis  either. 
According  to  the  case  law,  Article  114  TFEU  is  the  appropriate  legal  basis  for  approximation 
measures aimed at improving the conditions for the establishment and functioning of the internal 
market  by  removing  or  preventing  obstacles  to  fundamental  freedoms  or  distortions  of 
competition. However, according to the Roadmap, the aim is not precisely to eliminate distortions 
of  competition,  but  to  eliminate  so-called  structural  risks  and  deficits  below  the  radar  of 
competition law. Nor would the information and disclosure obligations for companies to "identify" 
risks, which the NCT would certainly entail, be covered by Article 114 TFEU, as the discussion on 
the establishment of a Single Market Information Instrument (SMIT) a few years ago showed. The 
latter failed not least because of the lack of a legal basis for the mandatory information and data 
collection rights provided for in the instrument. 

2. Identifying structural market problems and scenarios 

4. 

In  the  consultation  questionnaire  the  Commission  seeks  stakeholder  feedback  on  the 
characteristics of market conditions and scenarios where structural competition problems could 
potentially  be  identified:  anti-competitive  monopolisation  strategies,  oligopolistic  markets, 
markets where pricing algorithms are prevalent, tipping markets and markets characterized by 
“gatekeepers”.  

5.  We agree, that in specific cases, these situations may give rise to competition concerns, especially 
where  entry  barriers,  of  a  regulatory  or  non-regulatory  nature,  in  a  given  market  could  limit 
competition  from  existing  players  and/or  limit  new  entrants  into  the  market.  However,  we 
wonder whether markets tipping, dominance or network effects in themselves always require 
competition enforcement action. These can be a normal result of successful growth strategies 
and scale efficiencies and can generate economic and consumer benefits. They may however give 
rise to concerns where they lead to restrictions of competition and limit entry into a given market. 

6.  The Commission already has powers to conduct sector inquiries and take follow up action where 
such concerns arise. As we have seen in many instances in the past, a sector inquiry constitutes 
an effective and proportionate tool to identify structural competition problems and their possible 
harm to competition and consumer welfare; they provide the basis for the Commission to take 
action as required (e.g. recommendations, enforcement action, legislation). We therefore ask the 
Commission to focus on the effects on competition and consumer welfare rather than on market 
structures  themselves  and  provide for  these  to be  assessed  individually  on  their  merits  and 
effects. 

7.  A market structure approach runs the risk that it will necessarily have to be based on uncertain 
forecasts  of  future  market  developments  and  be  open  to  broad  interpretation,  leading  to 
considerable legal uncertainty and possibly false incentives for companies. 

8.  We  support a  case by case approach, rather than a  one-size-fits-all new tool.  Most retail and 
wholesale markets remain anchored in physical product markets where consumers pay for the 
products  and  services  that  they  purchase.  Providers  compete  on  price,  quality  of  service  and 
innovation and consumers shop around for the deal that they consider the most attractive.  There 
may be some exceptions where there are strong network effects (such as online search addressed 
in the Google Shopping case) and where it is harder for smaller rivals to compete because the 
service is offered free of charge to consumers and is monetised through ads.  In such cases there 
may be multi-sided network effects that increase barriers to entry. We ask the Commission to 
assess whether such individual instances would warrant the adoption of a completely new tool or 

•••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••  

2 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
could  be  included  in  the  review  of  the  existing  tools,  particularly  by  updating  the  market 
definition notice to take the dynamics of such multi-sided markets better into account. 

3. Tackling structural competition problems in existing and/or sector specific law 

9.  Where competition issues arise, it is appropriate for the Commission to review whether existing 
law  is  fit  for  purpose  or  whether  there  is  a  need  for  change  to  address  gaps  in  the  present 
legislation.  

10. A number of existing competition rules (the vertical and horizontal block exemption regulations 
and guidelines, the merger control regulation, the market definition notice, etc.) are under review 
to ensure that they are working properly and fit for the new digital environment. EuroCommerce 
welcomes this review process and considers that this could capture many of  the aspects the 
Commission is seeking to address with the New Competition Tool (NCT), and that this review 
should be completed before pressing ahead with widely-drawn new powers under the NCT.  For 
example, the existing tools could address potential gaps by:  

•  Tightening the definition of markets e.g. in respect of product substitutability, developing a 
common methodology to assess multi-sided markets including zero-price markets, and take 
better account of channel substitutability. 

•  Updating  the  existing  guidance  on  abusive  exclusionary  conduct  by  dominant  players1  to 

reflect the digital environment.  

•  Strengthening existing interim measures to ensure that infringements of Art. 101 and/or Art. 

102 TFEU are suspended or reversed while DG COMP comes to a final decision. 

•  Updating the horizontal guidelines on information exchange, particularly with regards to data 

• 

sharing, signalling and the risk of collusion in the context of algorithmic pricing. 
Including consideration of subsidies from foreign states to companies active in the internal 
market in the  State  Aid rules  as well as the  FDI Screening mechanism  as suggested in the 
Commission  White  Paper  on  Foreign  Subsidies2,  to  avoid  markets  tipping  due  to  state 
supported players leveraging their position in the home market to gain a privileged position 
on the internal market.  

11. We  are  concerned  with  the  term  “gatekeeper”  as  referred  to  in  section  18  of  the  NCT 
questionnaire. The  term  is largely undefined and open to  potentially very  wide  interpretation, 
leading to legal uncertainty. This could risk creating disincentives for businesses to grow further 
(see our contribution to section III of the DSA consultation for further elaboration). We see the 
Platform to Business Regulation as an important tool to ensure an open and transparent business 
environment online. We  ask  the  Commission to ensure that, if such an approach was  deemed 
necessary,  any  further  “ex  ante”  instrument  should  be  clearly  linked  to  that  regulation.  The 
Platform to Business regulation has however only been in application for a very limited time and 
should be allowed to demonstrate its effects on the market before adding further – potentially 
not needed - regulation on top of it – be it an ex ante instrument or the NCT.  

12. In other areas such as the aftersales market for car repair and payment cards and services, market 
failures have been identified and sector-specific regulation introduced to seek to remedy these 
failures. EuroCommerce supports such interventions when clearly justified and encourages the 
Commission to keep monitoring the need for updating existing, or developing new, sector-specific 
legislation where market failure is evident or where it has become clear that the existing sector 
specific regulation is not working as intended.  

13. As mentioned above the Commission already has the power to undertake sector inquiries “when 
it believes that a market is not working as well as it should, and also believes that breaches of the 
competition rules  might be a contributory factor”3  4.  Sector enquiries  have  proven effective  in 
uncovering  anticompetitive  behavior  and  in  providing  a  basis  for  the  Commission  to  take 

1 2009/C 45/02 Guidance on the Commission's enforcement priorities in applying Article 82 of the EC Treaty to 
abusive exclusionary  conduct  by  dominant  undertakings; This  guidance  sets  out  the practices  that  dominant 
players cannot engage in, but is very much based on the physical economy. 
2 European Commission White Paper on levelling the playing field as regards foreign subsidies, 17. June 2020 
3 DG COMP website here 
4 https://ec.europa.eu/competition/antitrust/sector_inquiries.html 

•••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••  

3 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
enforcement and/or regulatory action. Examples include the Commission’s e-commerce enquiry 
which led the  Commission to take  a  number of enforcement  actions  (e.g.  Nike, Sanrio,  Guess, 
Phillips & Marranz, etc)5. The inquiry into roaming opened in 20006 led to the adoption of the 
Roaming Regulation in 2015. The inquiry concerning payment cards in 2006,7 in addition to further 
enforcement action, was a step towards the 2012 Green paper and the Multilateral Interchange 
Fees Regulation adopted in 2015. Very recently the Commission also opened a sector inquiry into 
consumer IoT, looking into, amongst other things, the effects of voice assistance on competition8.  

14. This approach would be in line with current enforcement practice and in our view be sufficient 
and effective to address key issues identified by the Commission for the NCT9, without developing 
a completely new tool. Furthermore, it would allow the Commission to gather solid evidence to 
base any legislative actions on, in line with the better regulation guidelines 

15. We would also ask the Commission to take into account the cumulative impact of the  current 
wide set of initiatives10 as well as the ongoing implementation of the last legislature’s 16 Digital 
Single Market initiative covering EU online markets, and  to ensure equal treatment between EU 
and foreign-based operators.   

4. Limited scope including case-by-case effects tests 

16. We would hope that the Commission will address the concerns listed above before deciding to 
move ahead with a new tool. Any such proposal should have a clearly-defined scope, focusing on 
areas  where  competition  problems  have  been  observed  that  cannot  be  solved  by  more 
proportionate means and have an appreciable effect on trade between EU member states that 
is not limited to national or regional markets within one member state.  

17. Given  the  novel  nature  of  the  enforcement  powers  proposed  under  the  NCT,  we  consider  it 
advisable, should the Commission proceed with the  NCT,  to ensure that  all  regulators and the 
market  become  familiar  with  its  application  initially  in  a  limited  area  where  the  most  serious 
competition problems have been identified. We further recommend that the Commission clarify 
that any instrument should be applicable only in cases where there is a cross-border dimension, 
and not to purely national cases.  

18. A case-by-case approach based on  the specific activities companies are engaged in online and 
offline, and their effects on competition and consumer welfare are, in our view, more appropriate 
than  a  one-size  fits  all  approach.  With  regard  to  platforms,  as  defined  in  the  stakeholder 
consultation,  they  cover  widely  differing  types  of operators  offering diverse  services  with  only 
their use of the internet in common – a marketplace, a social media platform or a platform hosting 
apps are operating in very different markets and any instrument or regulatory action needs to 
take  those  different  circumstances  properly  into  account.  An  approach  based  on  effects  tests 
rather than focusing on certain market structures  would be  in line  with the  recommendations 
made by the three experts’ report to the Commission on “Competition policy in a digital era11”. 

5. Remedies and safeguards 

19. A new tool allowing the imposition of remedies without a finding of infringement could lead to 
a disproportionate interference in the market economy and have a chilling effect on innovation, 
growth and investment. Therefore, it is important that any new tool should be accompanied by 
appropriate safeguards, clearly defined rights of defense and due process, e.g. as provided for 

5 Guess (AT.40428) and consumer electronics (AT.40181, AT.40182, AT.40465 and AT.40469) 
6 https://ec.europa.eu/competition/sectors/telecommunications/archive/inquiries/roaming/index.html 
7 https://ec.europa.eu/commission/presscorner/detail/en/IP_06_496 
8 https://ec.europa.eu/commission/presscorner/detail/en/ip_20_1326 
99 see Commission IIA on a New Competition Tool here 
10 such as the industrial strategy, the development of a carbon border tax, a European instrument of reciprocity 
in public procurement, treatment of foreign state owned or subsidized enterprises, ensuring the effectiveness 
of European trade defense instruments with regard to subsidies, etc. 
11 Competition law in a digital era  

•••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••  

4 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
in the  UK  by the  Competition and Markets Authority under its market investigation tool12.This 
should  include  a  case-by-case  analysis  and  a  written  statement  of  objections  provided  to  the 
relevant addressees of any European Commission decision taken under the new tool. We would 
recommend that the Commission establish an independent panel and clear rules on transparency 
and involvement of the parties to ensure due process under any new tool.  

20. We would ask the Commission to fully assess the relationship between an NCT and Articles 101 
and  102  TFEU.  The  options  set  out  in  the  NCT  inception  impact  assessment  appear  to  target 
exclusively  or  to  a  very  substantial  extent  single  firm  conduct  but  without  providing  the 
substantive  and  procedural  safeguards  enshrined  in  Article  102  TFEU.  Absent  adequate 
safeguards, this could create an incentive to bring cases under the NCT instead of Article 102 TFEU. 
In particular, it should be made clear that Article 102 TFEU and not the NCT must be applied to 
any conduct caught by that Treaty provision to ensure that Article 102 TFEU remains the main EU 
competition law tool for addressing single firm conduct as contemplated by the Treaty. 

21. Imposing remedies to avoid markets tipping is similar to imposing interim measures, a tool which 
is already available. The Commission appears to be concerned that it will not be able to intervene 
sufficiently quickly in markets such as online search to protect competition effectively.  However, 
the Broadcom case shows that the existing toolbox enables the Commission to intervene quickly 
and tackle concerns with important issues such as exclusivity and prevention of multi-homing.   

22. While we can see the merits of applying interim measures and understand the ongoing discussion 
over the standard of proof, we do not believe that the burden of proof should be reversed. This 
would fundamentally change EU standards of due process and create legal uncertainty, with a risk 
of reducing incentives for companies to invest and innovate.  

23. Within  the  scope  of  proceedings  under  Art.  101  and  Art.  102,  the  Commission  can  already 
influence market structures today, in particular through obligations on the part of the companies, 
if  a  competition  problem  has  been  identified  beforehand  and  the  Commission  has  provided 
evidence of an infringement by the part of the companies concerned. Merger control also allows 
a no-fault market structure control. We therefore do not see the need for a new competition 
tool to achieve this.  

6. Relations with the ex ante instrument 

24. The  ex-ante  instrument and New Competition Tool  represent  two new regulatory  instruments 
aimed at achieving very similar objectives. We ask the Commission in its impact assessment to 
provide evidence that there is an overall need to establish a new mechanism whilst the existing 
competition rules are being adapted to address challenges arising from digitalisation and other 
market development, and substantiate the need for two different tools to address very similar 
issues. It would also be important to clarify exactly the interplay between the two instruments 
and  avoid  regulatory  overlap.  This  would  be  in  line  with  better  regulation  principles  and 
commitments to limit regulatory intervention to what is strictly necessary. 

Contact:  
Katinka Worsoe - +32 2 737 05 86 - worsoe@eurocommerce.eu  
Christel Delberghe - +32 7370591 – delberghe@eurocommerce.eu      

Transparency Register ID: 84973761187-60 

12 Guidelines for market investigations: Their role, procedure, assessment and remedies  

•••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••  

5 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
