Ref. Ares(2020)4723305 - 10/09/2020

THE LEGO MONOPOLY  

HOW PLATFORM FIRMS ARE CHALLENGING  

EUROPEAN COMPETITION LAW 

DIANA MONTENEGRO1 

INTRODUCTION 

Digital platforms are something new. Although digital platforms go back to the late 1990s, it 

was  until  a  few  years  ago  which  people  and  companies  started  using  online  platforms 

massively in almost all sectors. Factors like technologic innovation, overall Internet access, 

low  barriers  to  entry  to  the  platform,  minimal  regulations,  and  the  aim  of  giving  to  the 

resources a more efficient use, increased the number of people opting to use online platforms 

as a sustainable way of earning money.  

Nevertheless, it was soon realized that new platforms where only the tip of the iceberg of a 

general  and  massive  economy  system  which  has  been  labeled  as  "Sharing  economy”, 

“Collaborative economy”, “On-demand economy”, “Peer Economy”, “Platform Economy”, 

“Circular  Economy”  and  “Gig  Economy”2.  Furthermore,  others  prefer  to  use  terms  that 

1 Candidate Master of European and International Business, Competition and Regulatory Law at Freie Universität, the Year 

2021. PREPARATIVE DOCUMENT FOR THE EUROPEAN COMMISION PUBLIC CONSULTATION, SEPTEMBER 

2020.  

2 The term “Collaborative Economy” was first coined in 2007 by Ray Algar in the article titled “Collaborative 
Consumption”2.  But  the  concept  of  collaborative  consumption  began  to  become  popular  in  2010  with  the 
publication of the book “What´s Mine Is Yours: The Rise of Collaborative Consumption” by the authors Rachel 
Botsman and Roo Rogers2. In general, refers to an economic system built on distributed networks of connected 
individuals  based  on  sharing,  swapping,  trading,  or  renting  products  and  services  enabling  access  over 

1 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
denote a new economic order like "Post-industrial capitalism of the 21st century”, “Digital 

capitalism”  or  “Digital  Economy”.    While  some  authors  maintain  that  these  terms  are 

synonymous  others  criticize  that  they  refer  to  different  things.  But  apart  from  a  lack  of 

consensus about the label of the new economic phenomena, there is no consensus about its 

unique characteristics, and as a consequence, the lack of confinable empirical studies3.  

As well, Digital platforms were initially well-received and were identified as a new economy 

known as sharing or collaborative economy. Economic commentaries saw this new economy 

as a new source of beneficial competitive pressure and economic innovation. It was assumed 

that  digital  platforms  could  lead  to  an  increase  in  productivity  through  the  use  of 

underutilized  assets,  reduce  costs  transactions,  create  new  markets  through  disruptive 

innovation,  and  dispersion  of  innovation  among  incumbent  industries.  Also,  social  media 

platforms  were  seen  as  democratizing  devices  that  have  increased  the  voice  of  excluded 

members of different societies. For instance, it was highlighted how the digital platform´s 

firms  played  a  key  role  in  helping  to  organize  the  Black  Lives  Matter  movement  or  the 

protesters in Hong Kong. Due to all these promises, it was assumed the bonafide of profit-

making digital  platform  firms  and it was  avoiding legal  regulation since  digital  platforms 

have their forms of self-regulation. 

Despite the many benefits that digital innovation has brought much of the enthusiasm of the 

early years of the Internet has given way to skepticism. For instance, digital platforms started 

raised concerns about the lack of formalization and protection of gig workers, replacement 

of  labor  by  machines,  reinforcement  of  inequalities  by  technology,  absence  of  consumer 

protection  of  P2P  services.  Inquiries  about  civil  liability  for  platform  user´s  damages, 

cybersecurity  risks,  abuses  of  intellectual  property  rights,  and  the  closing  of  almost  all 

minutest newspapers. As well, the non-existence of legal clarity about the ownership of data 

collected by digital platforms according to with our legal systems, if digital platforms own 

ownership. While sharing economy is defined as an economic model based on sharing underutilized assets for 
monetary or non-monetary benefits. 
3 A recent communication of the  European Parliament stated that the term  “platform economy” is the  most 
objective  term  and  called  on  the  Commission  to  ensure  the  usage  of  coherent  terminology.  European 
Commission.  

2 

 
 
 
                                                           
the data which collect or just hold the data who own to others? or if the outcomes of artificial 

intelligent deserve the same legal treatment of the creations of human intelligence?  

Also, digital platforms raised family, personal and social fears such as data theft, isolation 

increased, family relations deterioration, dehumanization, privacy, and complaints about how 

home sharing makes feel neighbor's unsafety. Too, there are complaints about the increase 

of  fake  news  and  hate  speech;  today  is  no  clear  how  the  technology  which  made  content 

diffusion cheaper and gave billions of people voice, has also become a tool used by powers 

manipulation  and  propagate  disinformation  and  hate  talking.  In  a  nutshell,  all  these 

complaints  refer  to  the  impact  of  digital  platforms  on  the  pillars  of  our  human  being  a 

democratic society. 

As a result of the balance of the positive and negative impact of digital platforms, several 

controversies have arisen, especially about the need for legal regulation or if we continue to 

trust in the bona fide self-regulation of digital platforms.  

Besides, nowadays exists several legal complaints about unfair competition against digital 

platforms  around  the  globe.  But,  the  big  worry  about  digital  platforms  is  the  notorious 

economic  power  concentration  in  just  a  handful  number  of  firms  that  can  control  and 

influence billions of lives around the globe. It has been seen that while an increasing volume 

of commercial activities are been digitalized almost all economic growth and revenues in the 

digital economy is centered only in a few firms instead of the welfare of the overall society4.  

Thus, there is a worldwide debate about the need for changes to the current Competition Law 

framework to allow for enforcement action preserving economic competition in the modern 

economy.    In  fact,  among  European  legal  experts  exists  an  overwhelming  consensus  that 

when applying EU Competition Law to what has been called "Digital Markets" something is 

missing,  and  the  same  consensus  is  sharing  among  Competition  Law  experts  around  the 

4 In this line, the Digital Economy Report released on 4 September 2019 by the United Nations noted: “Digital 
advances have generated enormous wealth in record time, but that wealth has been concentrated around a 
small number of individuals, companies, and countries. Under current policies and regulations, this trajectory 
is likely to continue, further contributing to rising inequality. ONU REPORT (2019)  

3 

 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
globe5.  At  the  same  time,  there  is  a  consensus  of  the  need  for  regulation  for  this  new  of 

economy system6. 

Objective and aim of the work  

In this context,  this academic research pretends to analyze how digital  platform firms  are 

challenging  EU  Competition  Law  and  which  is  the  inherent  conflicting  competition  legal 

issue about these firms with actual Competition Law rules. 

This  academic  work  aims  to  support  that the  future  competition  EU  legal  rules  about  the 

modern  economy  may  be  done  based  on  a  deep  understanding  of  the  "Digital  Platform 

Business Model" and a special call to protect the firms which can be affected by this model. 

Too  sharing,  which  was  held  by  the  actual  European  commissioner  Vestager:  The  real 

guarantee of an innovative future comes from keeping markets open so that everybody, big 

or small, can compete to produce the best ideas7. 

Regarding  the  challenges  face  Competition  Law  for  the  modern  economy,  it  is  true  that 

Competition  Law  must  be  more  flexible  and  adaptative.  But  it  does  not  mean  that 

Competition  Law should base its legal  analysis in other legal  fields  such as protection of 

privacy,  consumer  Law,  or  wealth  distributive  concerns.  This  is  because  enforcement  of 

Competition  Law  must  be  based  on  a  hard-core  legal  theory  based  only  on  economic 

competition in the markets. 

5, For instance, the web seminary of concurrence competition organized in July 2020. 
6 Similarly, the principal drafter of the first antitrust law in the world, the US senator John Sherman who faced 
the wave of the start of the industrial revolution at the beginning of the 20th century held “Sur, now the people 
of the United States, as well as other countries are feeling the power and the grasp of this combinations, and 
are demanding of every Legislature and Congress a remedy for this evil, only grown into huge proportions in 
recent times. They had monopolies and mortmains of old, but never before such giants as in our day. You must 
heed their appeal or be ready for the socialist, the communist, and the nihilist”. For that time, “Antitrust law 
was instead desired by politicians and (in Europe) by scholars attentive to the pillars of the democratic systems, 
who  saw  it  as  an  answer  (if  not  the  answer)  to  a  crucial  problem  for  democracy:  the  emergence  from  the 
company or firm, as an expression of the fundamental freedom of individuals, of the opposite phenomenon of 
private power; a power devoid of legitimation and dangerously capable of infringing not just the economic 
freedom of other individuals. But also the balance of public decisions exposed to its domineering strength”. 
BRICS report, page 36.  
7 Cremer Report (2019). Page 14.  

4 

 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
Thus, in productive markets, Competition Law assumed than an effective competition inside 

markets between firms will lead to a lower price, the better quality of the products, and an 

intensification  of  the  overall  innovation  and  efficiency  in  that  market.  Of  course,  it  was 

recognized some exceptions, for instance when is more efficient one company than several 

actors in one specific market such theory of natural monopoly in energy and telecom markets, 

or the case of the army legal national monopoly for security reasons.  

Consequently, the enforcement of Competition Law in the new economy must be based on a 

similar strong theory but this does not mean just copy the competition theory of two-side 

productive markets to new cybernetic markets. This is because all economic actors changed 

in  the  modern  economy  due  to  the  digitalization  of  information.  Products  have  different 

characteristics  (smart  devices  opposite  to  low  price  goods),  consumers  changed  their 

preferences (quality instead of low prices), firms changed its structure (small firms versus 

Heavy industries of the 20th century) so the overall economic system changed.   

Structure and methodology  

This work is structured as follows. The first chapter is presented six problems that are facing 

Competition Law nowadays about digital platforms. The second part is a brief description of 

an overall analytics approach of the modern economy. The third chapter tries to outline how 

Competition Law should carry the legal analysis of digital platforms competitive games. 

Finally, the methodology will be the method diagnosis and solution and the language of this 

master thesis pretends to be didactic (many graphics as possible), objective and neutral, as 

academy must be. Because the big challenge that the new economy creates to us as society 

is  to  find  a  solution  fair  for  everybody,  and  the  best  way  to  reach  that  result  is  with  an 

inclusive, clear, and open social dialogue. 

5 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RESEARCH SOURCES 

As a coincidence, I start this academic research just when international debates about digital 

platforms have resulted in a chain of recent final expert reports around the globe about the 

competition of digital platforms. Consequently, this thesis is based on 14 final experts reports 

that have been published over the last two years in several countries about digital platforms: 

REPORTS ABOUT DIGITAL PLATFORM COMPETITION CONCERNS 

Table No. 1. 

Also,  this  academic  work  is  based  on  web  seminars  about  Competition  Law  which  were 

taking place in the current year and video recording conferences sharing in digital platforms. 

Too, in the recent EU Competition Law´s cases which involve digital platforms firms.  

6 

REPORTTITLED GEOGRAPHY DATE1OECDRETHINKING ANTITRUST TOOLS FOR MULTI-SIDED MARKETSOECD20182FURMANUNLOCKING COMPETITION IN DIGITAL MARKETS UK Digital Competition high  Expert Panel2019, March3CREMERCOMPETITION POLICY FOR THE DIGITAL ERA A report by Jackes Cremer, Yves-Alexande de Montjoye and Heike Schwetzer fot the EU Commission 2019, April4ACCC FINAL REPORT DIGITAL PLATFORMS INQUIRYAustralian Competition Authority CAAA2019, June5CMAFINAL REPORT MARKET STUDY OF ONLINE PLATFORMS AND DIGITAL Uk Competition Authority CMA2020, July6STIGLERFINAL REPORT STIGLER COMMITTE ON DIGITAL PLATFORMS USA Stigler Committe on digital Platforms2019, September7Law 4.0 A NEW COMPETITION FRAMEWORK FOR THE DIGITAL ECONOMYCommission Competition Law 4.0. presented to the German Federal Ministry for Economic Affairs and Energy 2019, September8BRICDIGITAL ERA COMPETITION: A BRICS VIEWBRICS Competition Law and Policy Center20199CEPALTHE REDEFINITION OF THE DIGITAL WORLDECLAC (Economic Commision for Latin America and the Caribbean)201810UNCTADRESTORING COMPETITION IN WINNER-TOOK-ALL DIGITAL PLATFORM MARKETSUNCTAD (United Nations Conference on trade and Development)2019, December11ONUDIGITAL PLATFORMS ONU201912UNCTADCOMPETITION ISSUES IN THE DIGITAL ECONOMYUNCTAD (United Nations Conference on trade and Development)2019, May 
 
 
 
 
 
THE COMPETITION LAW PROBLEM ABOUT PLATFORM FIRM 

CHAPTER I.  

Digital Platforms have started being a singular concern for Competition Law because in some 

cases digital platforms are not just a technological tool that can be used but some of them are 

competing  directly  with  traditional  companies.  But  the  principal  concern  which  shares 

competition authorities is about the notorious  economic dominant position held by digital 

platforms firms without being able to prove it with the traditional tools of Competition Law 

because  Competition  Law  enforcement  is  getting  increasingly  complex  when  applying  to 

digital intermediaries. Consequently, market players and policymakers are wondering: if the 

actual Competition Law´s tool kit is enough to handle the modern economy? And if not, How 

Competition Law should evolve to ensure that the digital era can benefit society?    

In  this  line,  in  June  2020,  the  European  Commission  launched  a  questionary  for  public 

consultation about new Competition Law rules for face "modern economy". In this inquiry, 

the  EU  Commission  explained  that  due  to  the  enforcement  experience  of  the  European 

Commission, and European national competition authorities, it has been identified certain 

structural  competition  problems 

that  actual  competition 

law  cannot 

tackle  (e.g. 

monopolization strategies by non-dominant companies with market power) or cannot address 

most  effectively  (e.g.  strategies  by  companies  with  market  power  to  extend  their  market 

position into multiple related markets). Thus, the European Commission asks:  If there is a 

need for a new competition tool to deal with structural competition problems that Articles 

101  and  102    of  the  EU  Treaty  cannot  tackle  conceptually  or  cannot  address  most 

effectively?; and what are the most important structural competition problems that should be 

tackled with such a new competition tool? 

The European Commission held that the proposal for new  competition tools is one of the 

measures aimed at making sure that EU competition policy and rules are fit for the modern 

economy.  It  meant  to  address  gaps in  the current EU competition  rules, which have been 

identified based on the Commission´s enforcement experience in "Digital Markets" which 

defined  (provisionally)  as  "Markets  largely  relying  on  digital  technologies  with  certain 

7 

 
 
 
 
specific characteristics, such as extreme economies of scale and scope strong network effects, 

zero pricing and data dependency."8.  

The objective of the public consultation is to collect stakeholder views about whether is a 

need for new competition tools to ensure fair and competitive markets and address structural 

competition problems in a timely and effective manner. In parallel, the Commission is also 

engaged in a process of exploring, in the context of the Digital Services Act package, ex-ante 

rules to ensure that markets characterized by large platforms with significant network effects 

acting as gatekeepers remain fair and contestable for innovators, businesses, and new market 

entrants. 

The  public  consultations  of  the  European  Commission  are  in  line  with  the  worldwide 

reflection process about the need for changes to the current Competition Law framework to 

allow for enforcement action preserving economic competition in the modern economy.  In 

fact, among European legal experts exists an overwhelming consensus that when applying 

EU Competition Law to what has been called "Digital Markets" something is missing. And 

the same consensus is sharing among Competition Law experts around the globe9.  

The problem created by digital platforms to Competition Law consists that legal operators 

have found an incredible complex meshing difficult to understand according to the traditional 

approach of Competition Law. For instance, the difficulty created because the same firm can 

be at the same time a consumer, a producer, a business partner, and a competitor of one digital 

platform  or  the  difficult  to  assess  when  a  firm  holds  a  Dominant  Position  in  the  modern 

economy.   

Due  to  this  difficulties,  scholars’  researches  have  started  a  recent  discussion  over  the 

implementation of Competition Law in the modern economy mainly focused on new issues 

such the importance of network effects, the role of big data, interoperability of technologies 

and  digital  ecosystems,  the  dynamic  of  the  “winner  takes  all”,  the  leveraging  strategy  of 

8 European Commission public consultation on a new competition law tool, June 2020.  
9 Concurrence competition web seminary in July 2020.  

8 

 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
digital  platforms  across  different  product  markets,  different  exclusionary  strategies,  non-

price strategies, learning-by-doing effects and lock-in effects of consumers to a network.  

To start unravelling this complex nest, this work divided the competition law analysis into 

five problems: (i) The problem about repeated abusive behavior by digital platforms firms; 

(ii)  The  market  structural  competition  problem  of  the  modern  economy.  (iii)  The  lack  of 

Competition  Law´s  tools  to  identified  competition  problems  (the  problem  to  identify  the 

problem); (iv) The lack of economic theory  about  the creation of the surplus-value in  the 

modern economy; and (v) The incredible amount of "a-legalities" (something that is not legal 

neither illegal) about modern economy conducts10.  

1.1.  PROBLEM  ONE:  REPEATED  ABUSIVE  BEHAVIOUR  BY  PLATFORM 

FIRMS 

In the last years, EU competition authorities, and several competition authorities around the 

globe,  have  obtained  several  complaints  about  platforms  firms'  abusive  behavior.  In  a 

nutshell, these conducts may be divided into the following types: (i) Conducts implemented 

by platform firms against platforms business partners; (ii) Refusal to deal between platform 

firms; (iii) The leveraging of market power to related markets by platform firms; (iv) The 

problem of Data´ Gatekeepers role; and (v) The tendency of digital markets to tipping. Each 

one  of  these  conducts  will  be  briefly  described  following.    Scenarios  falling  under  this 

category include unilateral strategies by non-dominant companies to monopolize a market 

through anti-competitive means. 

a.  Conducts implemented by platforms firms against its business partners  

Around  the  globe,  there  are  several  complaints  regarding  restraints  that  platform  firms 

imposed  on  their  business  partners  or  platform's  users.  Thus,  business  platform  users  are 

complaining that if they want to be presented in the digital platform they need to accept on 

terms and conditions which often are unfair, for instance, an excessive fee for the transactions 

using  the  digital  platform.  Thus,  digital  platforms  have  been  compared  with  a  vertical 

10 An alegality is something that has not been regulated by Law.  

9 

 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
integrated productive firm that implemented exclusionary conduct against its competitors. 

b. Refusal to deal between platform firms  

The second type of complaint consists that platform firms regularly exclude or refuse services 

of  competing  platform  firms.  These  conducts  have  been  classified  as  a  platform  versus 

platform competition. 

c. The leveraging of market power to related markets by platform firms 

The third category is complaints about the leveraging strategy used by platform firms to act 

in different product markets, sometimes unrelated between them. However, these complaints 

have not been proved yet. 

1.2.  PROBLEM  TWO:  THE  STRUCTURAL  COMPETITION  PROBLEM  ABOUT 

THE DIGITAL ECONOMY  

Structural problems refer to scenarios where certain market characteristics and the conduct 

of the companies operating in the markets create a threat for competition or where the market 

is not delivering competitive outcomes. 

a.  The tendency of digital markets to tipping   

It  has  been  claimed  that  the  digital  economy  is  populated  with  temporary  monopolies. 

Hardware  and  software  firms  hold  monopolies  today  knowing  that  new  technology  will 

emerge  that  will  topple  their  technology  and,  thus  overtake  their  monopoly  position.  In 

comparison,  the  industrial  economy  was  and  still  is,  populated  by  stable  oligopolies.  The 

central. The central difference between these two economies is that they have fundamentally 

different approaches to being successful: the driver in industrial economics is economy of 

scale, while the driver for the information economy is the network effect. 

The other type of conduct regarded digital platforms refers to the ability of the digital system 

leaders  to  utilize  network  effects  with  the  effect  of  tip  the  digital  platform  for  consumer 

10 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
attention  (e.g.  Facebook  digital  platform).  Here  the  system  leader  can  control  the  digital 

platform and its connected digital ecosystem and, thus, gain economic dominance inside that 

network market to a point where the system leader becomes a "winner takes all". Here, the 

successful platform firm which has been able to tip the market for the platform service may 

obtain power not only about the platform service market, but more importantly also about 

the  connected  business-users  utilizing  the  digital  platform.  Indeed,  the  system  leader 

controlling the digital platform gain power not only in the digital platform but in the whole 

connected  ecosystem  to  the  point  where  it  commands  the  interactions  of  the  ecosystem. 

Subsequently,  the  digital  platform  will  be  the  only  relevant  hub  and  GateKeeper  of  the 

ecosystem, so the other web sites, services, business-partners, and consumer-users will be 

enclosed in the digital ecosystem becoming dependent on the digital platform. 

Some authors held that when a market tipping occurred, the market must be defined as failed 

and the system leader becomes the regulator of that ecosystem, Competition Law should be 

utilized to create "competition inside the market (ecosystem)" rather than "competition for 

the platform's market". 

b. The monopolization of data 

The next complaints refer to the amount and uniqueness of the data obtained by firms that 

may  represent  power  on  separate  data  markets,  while  the  data  may  still  be  a  tool  to  be 

competitive.  The  big  digital  platforms  have  access  to  most  of  the  data  in  their  respective 

ecosystems, event though users in each ecosystem have access mainly to parts of their own 

generated  data.  Moreover,  Uber  and  some  other  digital  ecosystems  have  a  business  idea 

where the system leader collects exclusively the data generated by their users business (the 

drivers), while the drivers do not have the right to port the data from their customers should 

they wish to exit the Uber System. Indeed, access and control of data could reflect market 

power.   

Also. The use of artificial intelligence algorithms and data analytics could be the bottleneck 

in the modern economy, rather than access to large data-sets (big data). It seems clear that 

for example, some algorithms used and developed are better than basic software, and that 

11 

 
 
 
 
 
data analytics could be the relevant competition tool for the future. Indeed, the firm holding 

the best  algorithms will  be holding market  power rather then the firm holding the largest 

dataset. 

The  platform  firms  are  aimed  to  attract  and  hold  the  attention  of  consumers,  not  only  to 

harvest data but also more generally to influence their choice and manipulate their preference 

through some process of choice architecture. In the classic two-sided markets model, these 

digital  platforms  are  considered  matching  intermediaries  between  one  group  (e.g.  sellers, 

music  producers,  apps  developers,  drivers)  and  in  the  other  the  final  users  (potential 

consumers). Thus, data harvesting is indispensable for this process of matching of the two 

groups to work efficiently. Therefore, in reality, platform firms do not trade or sell access to 

the raw data od the users, which stay in the possession of the platform firm. Platform firms 

simply sell information, this is inferences from raw data which makes it possible to anticipate 

the preferences of the customer. Thus, production firms (or better firm which offer products 

in  the  markets)  value  a  lot  this  information,  to  the  extent  that  this  enables  firms  to  offer 

targeted advertising that would be more likely to attract the correct consumers and not just 

the dreamers consumers. 

Furthermore, system leaders have claimed a right to access all data from business users. thus, 

platform users are forced to give to the system leader advantage knowledge about the data. 

The system leader gains data from the whole ecosystem and will enable the system leader to 

innovate  about  the  ecosystem  and  the  member  of  the  ecosystem  can  be  excluded  from 

innovation. 

c. The problem of Data´s Gatekeeper role and the existence of a bottleneck  

The last complaints related to the role of platform firms as gatekeepers of various economic 

activities in the digital economy. This is about the privileged position of platform firms which 

can  locking-in  customers,  exclude  or  limit  interoperability  with  other  digital  systems  or 

machine, denied access to necessary data to compete. 

12 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1.3. PROBLEM THREE: THE PROBLEM OF IDENTIFYING THE PROBLEM FOR 

COMPETITION LAW 

Once the competition authorities have faced the two problems described above,  and when 

applied the legal  framework of Competition  Law to  Platform's Firms,  legal  operators and 

policymakers have realized that something is missing. In response, competition authorities 

have taken numerous new approaches to demonstrate a possible abuse of a dominant position 

by a platform firm. However, all these theories have been rejected by National Courts and 

there is not a unanimous consensus.  

Having noticed this conflict, some authors argued that Competition Law can not handle the 

challenges raised about the digital economy due to the missing legal dispositions while other 

authors alleged that the problem is about the analytical economy approach which is used to 

face the business model of the digital platforms. 

A.  The inherent difficulty of applying  the classic theory of two-sided markets to the 

digital economy 

According to the latest, it is notorious that applying the traditional Competition Law approach 

which is based on the economic theory of two-sided markets and production firms to network 

markets and platform firms creates an inherent conflict which until now has been impossible 

to be clarified by competition authorities. Some examples of this inherent conflict will be 

described. 

The  leading  theory  (almost  all  scholar  and  competition  authorities)  identified  digital 

platforms  as  multi-side markets  (MSM)  or  multisided  platforms  (MSP). According  to  the 

perspective of digital platforms as multi-side markets, platform firms have a conglomerate 

portfolio because are active on one specific market  but  as well in  downstream,  upstream, 

aftermarkets, and another not related markets. In respect with this approach the Competition 

Law problem is to determine the existence of a competition restriction by effect facing the 

difficulty  consideration  about  "out-of-market  efficiencies"  or  where  is  significant  market 

power, either in the market for the core platform service or in the separate market for products 

13 

 
 
 
 
 
 
and  services  which  are  being  sold  through  the  digital  platforms.  Moreover,  competition 

authorities  would  need  to  decide  about  digital  platforms  firms  which  are  participating  in 

several  markets:  (i)  which  market  will  serve  as  the  analysis  of  consumer  welfare,  (ii)  To 

balance costs and benefits for the consumers affected in all markets in which platform firms 

are participating and (iii) It would also require the possibility outweigh consumer harm in 

other markets. In practice, this may be difficult.    

Another  example  of  this  inherent  difficulty  is  the  market  definition  of  multi-side  markets 

under the SSNIP tests. If cross-side effects are positive, a price increase on one side that is 

profitable under a one-side analysis might become non-profitable. The decreases in sales on 

side A of the hypothetical monopolist´s platforms reduce sales on side B, which is typical of 

cross-side  effects,  the  further  provides  feedback  and  reduces  sales  on  side  A  further.  Not 

taking into account the cross-platform effects would lead to defined markets too narrowly. 

However, the cross-platform effect would be able to cover several markets. In practice, this 

may be difficult. 

B.  The  problem  to  determine  a  Dominant  Position  by  a  platform  firm  using  the 

classical approach 

Under the classical methodology using the relevant market and the SSNIP-test, it is difficult 

to identify market power in the digital economy. Among platforms, the biggest platform firms 

have been accused of holding market power due to the popularity of their respective digital 

platform and their advantage in the amount and quality of data and knowledge about platform 

users. thus, questions like if the amount and quality of data are the factors which create a 

dominant position? If a dominant position is the same that market power? Is market power 

the  only  parameter  to  determined  a  dominant  position?  Or  what  about  determined  a 

dominant position only based on the amount and quality of data? What is dominance in data 

when the amount of data always grows and that data can be duplicated without an enormous 

effort? And how to determine a monopoly if data is difficult to monopolize? 

Indeed, determine market power in the digital economy raises many questions left behind the 

classic theory of the economy based in two-side markets without considering network effects, 

14 

 
 
 
 
 
network externalities, advantage by data, and the high risk of markets tipping in favor of just 

one firm. 

It is true, that high-quality data and better predictive modeling algorithms, combined with 

the holding of a big amount of data may also quickly create and maintain a dominant position 

in multiple markets or even a monopoly in digital markets since the leader system will be the 

only one who has access to information related to the preferences, needs and purchase history 

of users. But the question still arises, how to define the market or markets affected? How to 

define the single economy unity which holds this power? This is about economic power or 

this is about technological power which leads to economic power in several markets? If so, 

what is the difference between both types of dominance?   

For instance, the German Competition Authority seemed to stress that system leaders within 

their ecosystem may be considered powerful enough to trigger a German competition law 

violation, even though not being dominant on general (platform) service markets. That would 

indicate that system leaders can be dominant on level two (Intra ecosystem) without being a 

dominant inter ecosystem (level one). 

C.  Competition law is more than a two-side market theory  

Competition Law´s difficulties arise is when competition authorities tried to deal with the 

post-industrial capitalism of the 21st century (called "Digital Capitalism") by applying the 

dominant  economic approach created to  face the  Industrial  capitalism  of the 20th century. 

Specifically, the neoclassical theory about economic value creation for production firms does 

not apply to the value creation model used by platforms firms. 

It has to notice that at the beginning of the 20th century (1900), Competition Law was created 

as a special field of law due to the concerns that the modern Industrial capitalism (of that 

time) was arising in a democratic society, especially the incredible success of a new business 

model  implemented  by  a  NorthAmerican  businessman:  Jhon  Rockefeller.  Consequently, 

during  the  following  century,  Competition  Law  was  based  in  abstract  economy  theories 

which explain in detail the value creation in the Industrial Capitalism (e.g. The theory of the 

15 

 
 
 
 
 
 
firm, the theory of value chain of Posner (1980), the theory of the perfect competition or the 

theory of the natural equilibrium to the markets). All these economic theories were by the 

neoclassical theory of the natural markets and the invisible hand of Adam Smith (the natural 

order of the markets due to the interaction between supply and demand). 

However,  once  the  classical  economy  doctrines  which  were  used  by  Competition  Law  to 

analyzed industries of the last century are used by competition authorities at the moment of 

evaluating digital platforms´ firm's competition game, it is soon manifested several inherent 

difficulties of such analytical exercise. At the same time, it has been noticing the difference 

between the industrial production industries of the twenty century and the platform firms of 

the new millennium.   

The  industrial  production  industries  were  characterized  by  low  prices  as  a  competitive 

advantage, economies of scale and scope, few network effects, ownership of several physical 

assets, productive efficiency, mass production, not digitalization of the industries´ functions, 

and  the  employe  of  a  huge  amount  of  workers.  Opposite,  Platforms  Firms  (PF)  are 

characterized  by  quality  and  brand  product  as  a  competitive  advantage,  networks  effects, 

almost null ownership of physical assets, technological path dependence, feedback processes, 

tipping points, leveraging market strategies, the outsourcing of almost all functions of the 

firm (e.g. IT desk, legal, logistic, receptions, transportation, marketing), the hire of minimum 

employees as possible and the use of intelligent machines which need a big amount of data 

to be trained11.  

In sum, the traditional economic theory to the digital economy does not provide adequate 

tools to fully comprehend the various dimensions of the new competition game and to guide 

public policy and Competition Law enforcement. Thus, it is a need to change the tools for 

identifying competition issues as the traditional methods do not seem to be working well in 

“Digital Markets”. For instance, according to with Cremer report (EU, 2019), there is not a 

11 Just one example, traditional hotels, and the digital platform firms Airbnb. Airbnb does not own the rooms 
that are used by its consumers, has fee employees if this is compared with the traditional hotels, and almost all 
its departments are outsourcing. 

16 

 
 
 
 
                                                           
 
need to rethink the fundamental goals of competition law in the light of the digital economy 

but it is necessary to adapt Competition Law methodologies and analytical tools, economic 

theories of harm and legal doctrines to the new environment. 

Competition law needs to abandon the sole focus on the relevant market in terms of price 

competition on the digital economy. Consequently, it is necessary to develop a new mapping 

tool that represents more accurately competition games in the digital economy. Moreover, if 

Competition Law does not change its analytical tools, it will help to retain and improve the 

current status-quo without a real search for answers to the accursed questions. 

One example, of other possible economic theories, is a branch of the economy which is called 

"Complex  Economy"  which  allows  an  augmenting  explanatory  power  in  the  context  of  a 

complex set of interactions between heterogeneous agents. Some of the concepts of complex 

economics have been gradually incorporated in Competition Law enforcement. Terms, such 

as  increasing  returns,  tipping  points,  leveraging  points  are  widely  used  by  scholars, 

competition authorities, and courts and form now part of the current approach in Competition 

Law. But one of the major impediments for the use of such novel approaches is the rigidity 

of the consumer welfare standard12.  

1.4. PROBLEM NO. 4: THE LACK OF A GLOBAL ECONOMY THEORY ABOUT 

VALUE CREATION IN THE MODERN ECONOMY  

Competition Law is traversing a period of the transaction. There is a need for the discussion 

over the role of competition law in the digital era to be integrated into the broader debate 

over the new processes of value generation and capture in the era of digital capitalism and 

the complex economy to which it has given rise to. Therefore, is essential to uncover the new 

value  capture  and  value  generation  processes  in  the  digital  economy  rather  than  take  the 

established  neoclassical  price  theory  economics  as  the  exclusive  economy  theory  which 

exists. 

12 BRIC report (2019).  

17 

 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
Therefore, Competition Law should first focus on the way the value brought by the digital 

economy is captured, shared, and generated, before exploring how this process affects the 

competitive strategies of firms. Only, when this effort is completed, it would be possible to 

re-target and re-conceptualize the Competition Law tools. 

Therefore, the first step of the new Competition Law map tool is to address in general the 

way that value is created in the digital economy. This is because one thing is notorious: the 

most important part of the surplus-value brought by digital innovation is held by platform 

firms.  However,  reports  which  have  been  issued  about  digital  platforms  competition 

problems have not so far integrated the competition question in a broader debate over the 

new processes of value generation and capture in the era of the digital economy. 

In  other  words,  the  first  step  to  find  a  solution  to  digital  economy  competition  problems 

would  consist  about  introduce  a  new  economy  theory  more  following  the  new  business 

model. This is learning about this business model using for platform firms and the taxonomy 

of digital platforms becomes an important starting point. The next chapter pretends to draw 

a line of how this taxonomy could be carried out in a multidisciplinary dialogue between law, 

economy, and technology. 

1.5. PROBLEM FIVE: “THE A-LEGALITIES”  

There  is  a  fact  assumption  platform  firms  are  the  owners  of  data  collected  through  its 

ecosystem. This means that data collected belongs to platform firms. It is true that already 

secrets law provides adequate security to data-holders against unwarranted use of data. 

Smart devices are indeed designed to collect raw data. Some of these data are personal data 

while others refer to non-personal data and even public data. Thus, it is currently an open 

debate about property rights on data, who owns data? It is no clear whether non-personal data 

is protected by Intelectual Property Rights.   

For some scholars, it must be granted a legal property right over non-personal data to the data 

producers (e.g. platform´s users or the owner of smart devices), or at least, the law must grant 

18 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
a right to access to data collected by platform firms, so it will give the possibility to digital 

users to utilize their data and contribute to the IoT system. At the same time, other authors 

questioned the introduction of a new IP right to data because the main justification for IP 

rights  is  the need to  secure incentives for innovators and creators, but  empirical  evidence 

shows that firms are amassing a large amount of data and there appears to be no need for 

additional incentives for firms to data collection.  

Other alegality, is about: If to the outcomes of artificial intelligence should be granted the 

same  protection  of  the  creations  of  human  intelligence?  In  other  words,  If  Intelectual 

Property Law covers artificial intelligence? 

Beyond the debate which is still open, the fact is that data ownership and artificial intelligence 

have not been regulated yet by Law. So this "a-legality" raised difficulties for competition 

authorities to evaluate anticompetitive conduct. Consequently, it is necessary to clarify the 

legal situation of data-ownership. 

In sum, once the five problems of Competition Law have been described, this work pretends 

to try to achieve a uniform approach to start solving these problems without pretending to 

resolve all problems which face Competition Law.   

19 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER TWO 

AN ABSTRACT AND STRUCTURAL OVERVIEW OF THE 

CYBERNETIC NETWORK ECONOMY  

Despite that several authors expressed that digital platforms are too diverse for a one-size-

fits-all solution, this part pretends to show: (a) All platforms firms shared the same business 

model.  Here,  “platform”  is  defined  as  a  business  model  that  creates  value  facilitating 

exchanges between two interdependent groups. Consequently, “platform firms” are profit-

making  firms  that  adopt  the  platform  business  model.  And  (b)  The  new  economy  system 

must be understood as a cybernetic-network economy system in which digital platform firms 

are just one type of agent in this interconnected global system.  

2.1. THE CYBERNETIC SPACE 

As a society, we share a conception that the Internet created a virtual space, this is like an 

imaginary space apart from the real world. However, if the economy is seen as a cybernetic 

system, the limit between virtual and real disappear. Accordingly, the first necessary step in 

the legal analysis is to ask, How we defined real space after the Internet?   

To  start,  it  is  necessary  to  keep  in  mind  that  there  are  five  important  shifts  which  are 

happening continually in the new modern economy:  

•  Digitalization: All firms are digitalizing their functions, including industries that were 

not previously digital. From a historical perspective, mankind's first step was to build a 

mass Internet infrastructure during the years and started sell in mass end-to-end devices 

that can be connected to the Internet network.   

•  Connectivity: Everything is getting connected day by day: through 5G network, millions 

of smart devices (e.g. smartphones, laptops, computers, phones, cars, houses, hospitals, 

pharmacies,  retails  shops,  banks,  companies,  wristwatches,  refrigerators,  washing 

machines, etc) will be connected to the Internet. 

20 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
•  Artificial Intelligence: Every connected thing is getting every day more intelligent smart 

devices);  

•  Specialty: Companies are getting smaller (few assets, fewer employees, and outsourcing 

most  of  the  firm  functions),  compared  with  the  bigger  industries  of  the  20th  century 

(characterized  by  the  ownership  of  big  assets,  many  workers  and  functions  inside  the 

firm). and; 

•  Globalization: Due to the Internet network, economic agents have access to goods and 

services  from  all  over  the  world  at  any  time,  just  need  to  connect  to  the  electronic 

connection network: the Internet. 

Indeed, the Internet change how human beings live, produce, work, consume, and connect. 

Due to the Internet, the same person can connect from everywhere in the world to the same 

digital platform. At the same time, real companies are offering their products to consumers 

around the globe and consumers can buy through online platforms everywhere. Thus, there 

are no geographical limitations to consume. Also, with the technology of augmented reality, 

a consumer on one side of the world (e.g. New Zealand) can be virtually present in the shop 

ubicated to the other side of the world (e.g. Alaska).  

As well, the Internet and new technologies changed the characteristics of the products. For 

instance, the smartphone  Industry provides an interesting is  for  the changing of the  value 

chain analysis because shows an inseparable connection between physical and digital aspects. 

This industry has evolved from basic physical-real mobile phones to smart-phones. Here, the 

value  chain  of  a  smart-phone  comprises  hardware  (the  physical  good),  software  (the 

operating system and other technical functionalities or digital components), app services (e.g. 

Internet navigation), and other digital functionalities.   

Another  change due to  the massive use of  Internet  network  is  that  Consumer preferences 

change  (quality,  cyber-security,  privacy  instead  of  low  prices)  and  product  characteristics 

every cycle are changing, this is products are getting, day by day, smarter.  

21 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Thus,  due  to  the  globally  used  of  the  Internet  and  new  technologies,  and  its  potential  to 

connect  everything  on  earth,  an  imaginary  virtual  world  has  permeated  our  collective 

consciousness: separate reality from an imaginary virtual world.  

For instance, we start thinking that digital commerce involves only trade about digital twins 

rather than the goods themselves, and that are two separate spaces without connection. Thus, 

there is a market for physical goods (the physical book) and another market for its digital 

twin  (e-book).  And  due  to  this  collective  assumption  of  an  imaginary  place,  we  make  a 

difference between “real markets with Brick-in-mortar firms” which are in the physical world 

and “virtual markets with Digital firms” who are in the imaginary digital space. However, 

interestingly, some competition authorities have observed that consumers tend to weigh the 

options available to them in offline and online markets before making a final decision. So, a 

significant increase in price in one space will cause the buyer to shift to the other space.  

In  sum,  there  is  an  imaginary  collective  approach  to  separate  both  types  of  markets:  real 

markets from virtual markets13, like the following graphic display:  

Figure No. 2.1. Real Markets and virtual Markets 

Source: Authors' elaboration. Candidate Master of European and International Business, Competition and Regulatory Law at Freie 

Universität (Berlin).  

13 Independently of how the virtual markets are configured for each author.  

22 

 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
The  consequence  of  the  division  between  real  and  virtual  space  is  that  is  assumed  that 

Competition Law should be divided into two different fields: The field of "Competition in 

the  real  markets",  which  is  about  the  economic  competition  between  real  firms  about 

production and consumption of physical products and physical services in the physical world, 

and the field of "Competition in the Digital Markets", which is a technological competition 

between digital agents about the way which digital information flows in the cybernetic space. 

In other words, regulation about digital firms would not be about the regulation of a new era 

(as in a time perspective) but digital platform regulation would be a regulation of an adjacent 

space: The digital space. 

However, when assessing this connected world, it would be a mistake to think in “a real-

world” and “a digital world” or to differentiate between “real market” and “data markets” as 

two  different  sectors  or  types  of  products.  The  correct  approach  must  consider  that  the 

expansion of smart devices which can connect to the Internet everywhere and everyone has 

created  a  network  that  implied  the  fusion  between  real  and  virtual,  between  the  digital 

economy  and  real  economy  in  which  the  real  agents  are  competitors  with  virtual  firms. 

Therefore, this new economy creates a huge challenge for Competition Law to define a law 

that mergers traditional social values, reality, economy, and technology. 

The  fact  is  that  the  shift  of  approach  of  how  to  understand  real  and  virtual  is  critical  to 

understand the way the Internet shaped the modern economy. If we understand the fusion 

between real and digital, it would allow us to move away from the naturalized understanding 

that  the  Internet  is  a  tool  for  entering  an  imaginary  virtual  world.  Opposite,  an  Internet 

network must be understood as a tool for living both in a virtual and real-life at the same 

time. And it is the reason why is better called the network-cybernetic economy.  

Also, this cybernetic perspective allows us to leave behind the conception that in a virtual 

world intelligent machines can decide14In the cybernetic economy, it is assumed that firms 

14 In all reports digital platforms are described as performed conducts by itself and it is notorious the difficulty 
to link the conducts performed by the digital platform with the firm or person who managed the firm.    

23 

 
 
 
 
                                                           
 
are managed by natural persons and that the only individuals able to take decisions are natural 

persons  (at  least  until  this  date).  And  to  achieve  the  comprehension  of  this  network-

cybernetic economy system, the first step is to describe the circular cycle of data valuation 

which starts since the data has been generated until the moment data is valuable.  

2.2. THE DATA CYCLE VALUE CREATION  

In a general and abstract overview, in the modern economy data is a source of value creation 

because data is fundamental to a firm's ability to compete because firms that have access to 

the best data will benefit from a competitive advantage over its competitors. Thus, due to the 

digitalization process which is taking place every day, in the new economy, the amount of 

digital  data  generated  increases  immensely  second  by  second,  and  this  data  flows  over  a 

circular economy system, cycle by cycle. Thus, the Cybernetic economy is like a does not 

stop  spinning  system  (dynamic)  enable  by  the  Internet  (the  network)  in  which  economy 

agents, machines, and products are in continuous development in each data cycle. Just as the 

following sketch is intended to display:  

Figure 2.2. The cybernetic economy  

Source: Authors' elaboration. Candidate Master of European and International Business, Competition and Regulatory Law at Freie 

Universität (Berlin)15.  

15 The circle with the dashed line is what we understand by real markets.  

24 

 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
As the graphic showed, there are four segments according to the activity carried out: Data 

generation (I), Data Collection (II), Data storage (III), and Data Analytics (IV). Each segment 

will be described separately below.   

A. First segment: Data Generation 

The first step of the data cycle is the generation of the data. One data is generated when input 

is entered into a machine. This process is known as the digitalization of the information. This 

is when data is entered into a digital ecosystem. For instance, when a consumer using the 

web  site  interface  of  a  search  engine  write  "I  want  to  buy  a  car".  This  personal  action 

generated data. Such use of the Internet generated one digital data which includes browsing 

and shopping history, goods ratings, inquiries about the Internet user. Also, smart devices 

with sensors collect raw data from the environment. 

Data  are  generated  by  web  users,  consumers,  governments,  schools,  families,  healthcare 

institutions,  environment,  and  physical  phenomena,  through  several  smart  devices  such 

personal  laptops,  photo  cameras,  personal  smart-phones,  tablets,  smart-watches,  smart-

fridges, smart-car, smart-buildings, voice recorder machines, satellite pictures, and sensors 

machines.   

This individual raw data can be just deleted (and not generate surplus value) or this raw data 

can be transferred using the network Internet to another digital system (thus this raw data can 

generate surplus value) and start the next segment. 

B. Second segment: The collection of raw data 

In  the  second  segment,  once  raw  data  has  been  produced  is  transferred  using  an  Internet 

network to another digital system. Here is the activity to collect raw data. The ways that firms 

collected raw data are many.  

25 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The collection and the activity of data analytics can be done internally for the production 

firms  in  a  very  simple  way  (e.g.  an  analysis  of  a  table  in  excel  about  prices  charged  to 

costumers). Therefore, data don't leave the production firm. 

However,  some  firms  are  dedicated  exclusivity  to  collect  data  from  different  sources 

according  to  legal  rules.  Firms  which  are  called  Data  Brokers  (e.g.  Acxiom,  Experian, 

Epsilon, Core-Logic, Datalogic, Peekyou, Exacts). Example of the sources of data is: through 

the transactions made using the firm web page, asking directly to clients, surveys, from nature 

and  space,  from  public  governmental  web  sites,  public  social  media  information,  video-

sharing platforms, twitter digital platform, buying other specialized market researches, other 

firms web sites, through web indexation, telephonic guides, agreements of transfer of data 

with other firms, taking digital pictures, digitalization books of the physical libraries, between 

hundreds of others ways to collect data. 

Other firms just own a digital platform to collect a vast amount of data as possible. These 

firms can be called "Platform Firms" which can obtain a vast amount of raw data about their 

users.  

C.  Third segment: Storage of Big Data 

Due to the big amount of data collected, production firms can invest in private storage (e.g. 

internal servers) or can hire the service of data storage to a third party. For instance, a cloud 

computer storage provider. 

Due to the big amount of data that can be collected every second, Big Data represents a new 

scale  of  datasets  so  voluminous.  For  instance,  “The  amount  of  data  added  to  the  global 

dataset every day is quantifiable at around 2.5. quintillion bytes per day on average and this 

number continues to grow”16.  

16 BRICS REPORT. Page 120. 

26 

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
                                                           
The definition of Big data recognized by most scholars was held by Gartner`s (2001) such 

“high-volume, high-speed and /or high-variety information assets that demand cost-effective, 

innovative forms of information processing that enable enhanced insight, decision making, 

and process automation”17.  

Gartner`s definition is based on the enunciation of three broad dimensions of data processing, 

also called the “3 Vs”, that help to understand Big Data: (a) High Volume: it is the increase 

and significant size of the data volume that differentiates Big Data from conventional data 

analysis. This volume dimension is often considered to be the most relative. For instance, 

worldwide digital data have grown from t2,8 zettabytes in 2012 and will rise to 40 zettabytes 

in  202018.  (b)  High-Variety:  In  addition  to  a  quantity  of  information  that  surpasses 

conventional data analysis tools, the format of these data is also very different. These data 

are raw, semi-structured, or even unstructured, and (c) High-Velocity: These growing data 

streams  are  in  perpetual  development  and  require  real-time  processing  to  avoid  the 

obsolescence of the statics obtained.   

The storage ensures that data will be maintained, being relatively easy to access, secure, and 

amenable to verification. 

D. Four segments: Data analytics and the generation of smart data 

The last circular segment of the modern economy is data analytics. Due to the amount and 

complexity of data, Production Firms (PF) and Platform Firms (PTF) need performance the 

analytics  of  data  to  obtain  valuable  information  (e.g.  clients  who  are  willing  to  buy  its 

services). Thus, firms need to gain a greater understanding of the individual preference of the 

consumers (for production firms) and clients (for platform firms). 

Like  it  was  said,  data  analytics  can  be  done  internally  for  the  production  firms  in  a  very 

simple way for production firms. For instance, a bank can have an IT department exclusively 

17 International Data Corporation, the  weight of Big data  in the  global  market in 2020 is estimated at $203 
billion.  
18 Garner paper.  

27 

 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
to make data analytics about its clients and data will never leave the bank. But data analytics 

can  be  done  for  a  third  party.  In  practice,  financial  institutions  are  the  main  suppliers  of 

information about users' financial transactions while are the main consumers or information 

about financial consumers. 

Today, Data Analytics Activity (DAA) is done on a huge scale using artificial intelligence 

technology. 

Artificial intelligence technology, the high-level expert group on artificial intelligence set up 

by  the  European  Commission  in  2019,  proposes  the  definition  of  artificial  intelligence 

systems  as  “(..)  software  (and  possible  also  hardware)  designed  by  humans,  that  given  a 

complex  goal,  act  in  the  physical  or  digital  dimension  by  perceiving  their  environment 

through  data  acquisition,  interpreting  the  collected  structured  or  unstructured  data, 

reasoning  on  the  knowledge,  or  processing  the  information,  derived  from this data and 

deciding the best action(s) to take to achieve the given goal.”19.   

At the same time, the AI HLEG explained that the artificial intelligence system consists of 

three main elements: sensors, operational logic, and actuators. Sensors collect raw data from 

the environment, actuators act  to change the  state of the environment  and  the operational 

logic system is which makes the decisions. 

In the beginning, the operational logic system of the AI devices was based on simple logic 

rules, so it was a based decision-making process (called quasi-artificial intelligent systems 

or artificial intelligence conventional). For instance, think about a robot called SAM that is 

learning how to move  forward.  The  operational  logic  of  the  computer  program  is:  If  the 

traffic light is yellow  you have  to  walk  forward  but  it  is  red  you  have  to  stop.  Here,  the 

programmer was  directly in control of the input and the output.  These operational logical 

systems were  not fully autonomous because AI  acted in a manner predetermined by their 

programming.  

19 High-level expert group on artificial intelligence set up by the European Commission in 2019. 

28 

 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
However, due to the development of a subset of AI called Machine Learning, today is taking 

place  the  creation  of  artificial  intelligence  systems  that  “Instead  of  programming  the 

computer every step of the way,  this  approach  gives  the  computer  instructions  that allow 

it to learn from data without new step-by-step instructions by the programmer. This means 

computers  can  be  used  now  for  new,  complicated  tasks  that  could  not  be  manually 

programmed.  Things  like  photo  recognition  applications  for  the  visually  impaired,  or 

translating pictures into speech.”20.  

Thus,  when  using the  Machine Learning technique,  instead  of  programming  the  computer 

every step of the way (e.g. rules in SAM robot example), the programmer gives the software 

computer instructions (algorithms) that allow it to learn from data without new step-by-step 

instructions. For example, when  applied  ML  to  art-works,  AI  software  i s   learning  from 

data to generate a  new  piece of work, making independent decisions to determine what the 
new  art-piece  looks  like.  One  case  is  The  Next  Rembrandt  portrait  project  which  is  a 

computer-generated 3-D-printed painting developed by a facial-recognition algorithm (code 

program) that scanned data (input) from 346 known  paintings  by  the  Dutch  painter  for  18 

months21. 

As was showed, Machine Learning (ML) approach taught the algorithm to reach an outcome 

by showing them many examples of correct outcomes. Thus, it can be seen that the basic 

process of ML is to give training data to a  learning algorithm  (e.g.  346  Rembrandt´s paints) 

afterwards the algorithm generated the final output.  

To infer new instructions from the data entered is the core strength of ML. So, the more data 

available to train the algorithm, the more it learns. Here, Big Data is important because Data 

Analytics Activity (DAA) needs a huge amount of data for its improvement. This is because 

more data can be input to the artificial intelligence algorithm, the outcomes of the algorithm 

will be able more precise (smart data). 

20 Reference.  
21 Rembrand Portrait article.  

29 

 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
The real technology behind the current developments of Machine Learning technique which 

uses  data  to  adjust  algorithms  (sequence  of  instructions in  code  of  the  software)  is  Deep 

Learning.  

Deep Learning uses complex algorithms, called neural networks22, which makes choices that 

could  be  logical  outcomes  of  the  algorithm  used  but  inexplicable  for  the  humans.  These 

complex  algorithms  simulate  the  human  learning  process.  This  is  the  reason  why  neural 

networks have been often been referred to as a black box because do not indicate how data 

could interrelate and the output is far too complex for the human mind to understand23.  

Once the black box of artificial intelligence has produced smart data, Smart Data is useful, 

intelligible, and profitable due to the greatest number of firms and people who demand it.  

The firms in which performance Data Analytics Activity (DAA) can sell directly this data to 

its clients (e.g. selling of a data set to production firms, governments, or to schools). Thus, 

production firms can use this smart data to adjust production plans and increasing business 

competitiveness. 

Also,  firms  in  which  performance  Data  Analytics  Activity  (DAA)  can  opt  for  not  to  sell 

directly this data to its clients but sell some services based on this smart data. For example, 

target advertising with more attractive recommendations for consumers and the formation of 

targeted marketing strategies. 

In few cases, firms in which performance Data Analytics Activity (DAA) can get to a point 

of  having  so  much  information  about  consumers  that  can  cross  the  line  between  legal 

22  In  a  nutshell,  “Neural  networks  involve  repeatedly  interconnecting  thousands  or  millions  of  simple 
transformations into  a  large  statistical  machine  that  can  learn  sophisticated  relationships  between  inputs 
and  outputs.  In other words, neural networks modify their code to find and optimize links between inputs and 
outputs”. 
23  Finally,  thus,  thanks  to  deep  learning  in  the  space  of  the  last  few  years,  image  recognition,  speech 
recognition, drug discovery, as well as robotics, all have reached news levels of performance. However, in the 
legal field, an algorithm means that no one, including its operators, has access to the source code (the list of 
human-readable  instructions  that  the  software  programmer  writes.).  Consequently,  transparency  around  AI  
algorithmic decisions is limited by technical literacy (the black box problem). 

30 

 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
advertising  and  illegal  manipulation  of  consumers,  especially  the  most  vulnerable,  as 

teenagers. 

Once the smart data has been formed with the activity of Data Analytics Activity (DAA) this 

is transfer to production firms which are very interesting in this kind of valuable data. Thus, 

Production  Firms  (PF)  buy  data  sets  that  contained  very  valuable  smart  data.  Thus,  Data 

Analytics  Activity  (DAA)  improves  the  knowledge  of  the  consumers  and  the  production 

process in the economy. And once data clients have obtained smart data, a new data cycle 

will be started again with the generation of new raw data (but in the new cycle raw data will 

be a little smarter). 

This does not stop spinning movement lead that every day the production process gets better 

and therefore the products get better. Moreover, mankind's progress has been immense in the 

last years due to Big Data and Artificial Intelligence. For instance, it has been possible for 

big mankind´s projects such as the recodification of the human genome in less than a day, 

astronomy,  physical  quantic  aeronautics,  and  meteorology  have  also  benefit.  Moreover, 

mankind's  progress  has  been  immense  in  the  last  years  due  to  Big  Data  and  Artificial 

Intelligence.  For  instance,  it  has  been  possible  for  big  mankind  projects  such  as  the 

recodification  of  the  human  genome  in  less  than  a  day,  astronomy,  aeronautics,  and 

meteorology have also benefit. 

From an analyzer and maybe because the four activities (generation, collection, storage, and 

analytics  od  data)  are  done  in  micro-seconds  it  does  not  easily  make  the  differentiation 

between these four digital economy activities. And can be argued that before these activities 

occurred at the same time, just one firm need to be allowed to concentrate the four activities.  

Finally, in line that this work is aimed to describe platform firms' competitive game, the only 

segment  which  it  will  take  into  consideration  is  the  third  segment  which  is  about  data 

collection, the other three segments (data generation, storage, and data analytics activity) will 

not take into consideration for the aim of this research. As well, as other forms of collect data 

which do not related to the platform firm’s business model.   

31 

 
 
 
 
 
2.3. PLATFORM DEFINITION  

In general, the platform economy has been broadly defined as an economic system that is 

based on digital platforms. Under this approach, digital platforms are assumed as an object 

which is neutral in the transactions that occurred through this technological infrastructure.  

This definition emphasizes a digital platform (as technological infrastructure) as the critical 

component of this new economic system. However, few authors agree exactly which digital 

platforms  and  why  are  included.  Indeed,  the  diversity  of  digital  platforms  is  large  and 

growing24 

However, the concept of “platform” is used to denote various meanings: 

i.  Platform as an object: From a technical point of view, a digital platform is a code base 

on  which  third-party  complementary  modules  can  be  added,  allowing  third-party 

development of complementary systems that can be offered to end users as applications 

or services.   

ii.  Platform  as  a  business  model:  According  to  the  World  Economic  Forum  (2017), 

platforms  are  technology-enabled  business  models  that  create  value  by  facilitating 

exchanges and interactions.  

24, For instance, some authors, such Codagnone (2016) held that the platform economy is composed of: "(…) 
digital platforms, often operating as two-side markets (…) matching different groups of users and providers 
and enabling the increase in scale and speed for traditional transactions such as selling, renting, lending, labor 
trade, and provision of services.”.   

32 

 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
2.4. THE PLATFORM BUSINESS MODEL  

The platform is a new business model that is adopted with the aim of profit-making by some 

firms which its characteristics can be as follow25:  

A.  The structure of the platform business model is different from the structure of the 

pipeline business model  

In the industrial business model, the firm creates the product (good or service). As well if is 

vertically integrated distribute the product until the final consumer which is the individual 

which consume the product. 

Figure 2.3.  The Industrial Business Model  

Source: YouTube video recording conference.  

Opposite, according to the platform business model the firm does not create the product, but 

the  firm  is  centered  in  enable  interactions  around  a  digital  platform  (technological 

infrastructure).  Here,  the  economic  function  of  the  firm  is  improving  the  quality  and  the 

number of interactions because more interactions in the platform mean more opportunity to 

capture value.  To do that, a platform firm follows four steps. 

First, the firm need producers to create a digital inventory and put it into the platform (e.g. 

videos). Second, the firm needs consumers to connect with that inventory. Third, consumers 

must consume the value represented by that inventory. This can be such as making a purchase 

of  a  physical  good  (or  downloading  an  App.  Finally,  the  four-step  is  when  the  consumer 

creates value. This value is given to the producer in exchange for what he consumed. This 

25 This characteristic are a summary of several talks which are video recording and upload to Youtube digital 
platform.  

33 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
compensation does not to be money because there are many other kinds of value currency, 

including share, likes, reputation, or attention. 

Figure No. 2.4. The Platform Business Model  

Source: YouTube video recording conference.  

These four steps are actions that the firm needs end-users to take for them to exchange the 

value. The firm does not control each step, but it builds the technological and organizational 

infrastructure to support and incentivize the actions.  

Apart from these four actions, the firm needs to implement other activities that support and 

frame  the  actions  the  firm  need  the  platform  users  to  take  in  the  core  transactions:  (a) 

Audience building; (b) Matchmaking; (c) Create rules and standards and (d) Provide Key 

tools and services.   

In the audience building function, the firm needs to attract users into the platform. So, the 

firm needs to create a large enough network in which supply and demand will overlap and 

transactions will be started to happen. In this process, the firm can operate under economic 

losses. Once the user comes into the platform the firm needs matchmaking to match the right 

customers with the right producers. Otherwise, users will be leaving the firm. 

The third activity refers to establish the rules about what is explicitly allow and forbidden. 

As well, as the standards that establish what kind of behavior is encouraged or discouraged. 

Access to the platform is about who can join and who doesn´t and why. In other words, is 

about the quantity of the users. But the firm needs to maintain the quality of the transactions 

34 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
over time using data and platform’s users’ feedback. If the firms do not do that, transaction 

quality will be decreased and the network grows, and users will be left.    

Finally, the firm needs to provide the technology infrastructure that supports each step of the 

core transaction. 

In the beginning, the firm started with one core transaction between two groups. Thus, the 

primary activity of the platform is the core transaction. This is the set of actions that firms 

need  users  to  take  to  transactions  that  happen.  But  the  firm  will  continually  add  more 

transactions. 

Figure 2.5. The core transaction  

Source: Authors' elaboration. Candidate Master of European and International Business, Competition and Regulatory Law at Freie 

Universität (Berlin).  

One  example  is  the  Linked-in  platform  firm.  The  core  interaction  is  the  contact  between 

professionals (core transaction). But this platform firm has added more interactions to the 

platform as the interaction between recruiters (group 2) and job seekers (group one). 

B.  The  firm  is  getting  inverted:  From  focus  in  the  internal  process  to  focus  on  the 

external interactions 

In the industrial business model with the aim of male profit, the firm needs to compete on 

based to low prices. The firm looks for economies of scale or scope. Consequently, firms are 

focus on their internal process with the aim to achieve mass production. Too, these firms are 

aimed to integrate all the functions to the firm. Also, these firms own their inventory and sell 

it to customers which pay a price for the product26.  

26 Today, the "global value chain (VGC)", refers to an economic paradigm and a conceptual framework that 
brings together insights from a broad range of disciplinary fields. This framework has, however, gained practical 

35 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
Opposite, platform firms are not focused on the internal process of production but in enable 

interactions. At the same time, these firms do not own their inventory and outsourced most 

of  its  functions  (e.g.  Human  resources  management,  IT,  logistics,  marketing,  legal 

department, publicity departments, cleaning workers are outsourcing). 

For instance, two competitors. Airbnb and Marriot Hotels. Airbnb is a platform firm that does 

not own the rooms (platform inventory) which are rented through its platform. The economic 

function  of  Airbnb  is  improving  the  quality  and  the  quantity  of  the  interactions  using  its 

digital platform. Opposite, Marriot Hotels own the hotel infrastructure and is aimed to offer 

the service of accommodation.  

C.  The creation of the cybernetic ecosystem 

Too, due to platform firms are inverted, a Cybernetic- ecosystem is built around the digital 

platform.  This  cybernetic  ecosystem  is  composed  of  several  digital  and  non-digital 

components (e.g. cables). With the aim of the well-functioning of its ecosystem, platform 

firms need to keep the governance of its Cybernetic-ecosystem to reach efficient coordination 

between all the functionalities and components which are part of this ecosystem. For instance, 

one  of  the  measures  to  keep  the  correct  functioning  of  the  Cybernetic-ecosystem  is  the 

exclusion of defectives components of its ecosystem.  

Moreover, Platform Firms need the expansion of its ecosystem because between more users 

more Data can be obtained. Consequently, Platform Firms  are using strategies for  adding 

new functionalities or components to their Cybernetic-ecosystem (leverage strategy). Too, 

platform firms have strong incentives to retain control of their ecosystems. To achieve this, 

platform firms need to close critical points of their digital ecosystem.  

importance by providing the conceptual underpinning of numerous policies and strategic analyses. Countries 
rely on the GVC to explore political economics considering value-added and capture of value in the value chain.  
GVC analysis has become a heuristic to understand the interconnectedness of global economic activity across 
time and space and enables us to point out dynamics between actors and processes.   

36 

 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
 
Thus, in a theoretical framework, the firm is inverted. This is, we are in a process from huge 

firms to the smallest firm as possible. 

Figure 2.6. The creation of the cybernetic ecosystem due to platform firm is inverted 

Source: Authors' elaboration. Candidate Master of European and International Business, Competition and Regulatory Law at Freie 

Universität (Berlin).  

In Parallel, in the current process of digitalization, traditional companies are starting the same 

process. First, they started to outsource many of its functions, and second, production firms 

start to be collecting information about its industry. For instance, in healthcare industry firms 

will not be limited to sell physical drugs but will be started to collecting information on the 

patient´s  conditions  (e.g.  digital  medical  records,  medication  history,  genomic  data,  and 

lifestyle data). This digitalization would lead to the development of a personalized healthcare 

and  precision  medicine  to  identify  optimal  therapies  which  are  more  beneficial  for  the 

patients. Subsequently, to develop a more effective therapy pharmaceutical firm will need 

every day more and more data about its patients. And due to the new economy, production 

firms are starting to create and growing their cybernetic-ecosystem as well.  

Hence, for digital platform firms, and production firms, competitiveness is about how much 

data  the  firm  has  about  the  new  form  of  digital  value  in  its  industry  and  not  how  many 

products sell the firm. 

37 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
D.  The Governance of the Cybernetic ecosystem 

Thus, the governance of the ecosystem is very important, because the business model is not 

just  about  the  quantity  of  the  transactions  but  too  about  the  quality  of  the  transactions. 

Moreover,  the  production  of  more  complex  products  requiring  a  more  centralized 

organization for control.  

Thus,  the  coordination  of  the  cybernetic-ecosystem  is  about  how  to  manage  participants 

better. Thus, with the aim of the well-functioning of its ecosystem, platform firms need to 

keep the governance of its Cybernetic-ecosystem to reach efficient coordination between all 

the functionalities and components which are part of this ecosystem. 

For instance, one of the measures to keep the correct functioning of the Cybernetic-ecosystem 

is  the  exclusion  of  defectives  components  of  its ecosystem  which  are  not  anticompetitive 

conduct. Moreover, platform firms need the expansion of their ecosystem because between 

more users more Data can be obtained. Consequently, Platform Firms are using strategies for 

adding new functionalities or components to their Cybernetic-ecosystem (leverage strategy). 

Too,  platform  firms  have  strong  incentives  to  retain  the  control  of  their  ecosystems.  To 

achieve this, platform firms need to close critical points of their digital ecosystem (tipping 

strategy).  

E.  Network effects 

Once the platform is created the network effects start to be important. The more people come 

into  the  digital  platform  more  people  benefit  from  all  these  people  in  the  ecosystem.  For 

instance,  the  more  drivers  come  on  board,  the  more  consumers  are  affiliated  with  the 

platform. All suppliers and demandants started to agglutinate together in one platform. So, 

the platform takes a form of the winner takes all and this situation give the platform firm a 

lot of economic power in that industry. 

38 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Thus, the premise is that goods can be easily copied but networks don't. if a man is looking 

for a good business must go and look for a network. Is not about selling a product, is about 

buy something that customers can not get anywhere else. 

F.  Data analytics  

As was said, for digital platform firm's competitiveness is about the quantity and quality of 

data the firm has about the new form of digital value in its industry. To achieve it digital 

platforms firms often performance Data Analytics Activity (DAA).  

2.5. CLASIFICATION DIGITAL PLATFORMS FIRMS 

Like it was described before, in the new economy, Platform Firms (PF) are profit-making 

firms  that  create  surplus  value  through  a  new  business  model  called  "Digital  Platform 

Business Model" which facilitates transactions between two or more interdependent groups. 

A.  Classification according to the transaction model 

Digital  platform  firms  cab  be  classified  according  to  the  transaction  model  that  can  be 

applied:  (a)  Business-to-Consumer  (B2C):  Business  owns  the  inventory  and  facilitates 

transactions among users; (b) Peer-to-Peer (P2P): Assets are owned and exchanged directly 

person to person. (c) Business-to-business (B2B): Solutions that enable the business.  

B.  Classification according to core transaction 

Too,  digital  platform  firms  can  be  classified  according  to  the  characteristics  of  their  core 

transaction as follow.  

(i) The core transaction is the Online-content sharing 

The  digital  platforms  are  known  as  "online-content  sharing  platforms”  they  facilitate  the 

interactions  between  content  providers  and  final  consumers  (e.g.  Youtube,  Twitter, 

Facebook, Instagram, Redtube, tik-tok, Linked-in, Netflix, Pinterest).  

39 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The online-content sharing platforms are regulated by the EU regulation and Directives in 

relation  with  the  content  which  is  shown  in  the  digital  platforms,  especially  about  the 

protection of copyrights holders27. Too, there are cases of the EU Court holding the principle 

of a reasonable and appropriate remuneration for the use of copyright work.  

(ii)  The core transaction is the interchange of physical goods (Marketplaces) 

The  digital  platforms  are  known  as  "online-content  sharing  platforms"  they  facilitate  the 

interactions  between  content  providers  and  final  consumers  (e.g.  Amazon,  Alibaba, 

Liferando  (local  food),  eBay,  MercadoLibre,  OLX).  The  digital  labour  platforms  can  be 

classified between Web-based and location-based. E-Commerce Directive. 

Some authors called these relationships "Co-petition". For instance, Amazon is a competitor 

with national courier delivery services (e.g. FedEx) but at the same time is their customer. 

The debate about "private electronic marketplaces" is about its dual as a platform and as a 

merchant28. This dual role produces a conflict of interest in the Digital Platform Firm, as well 

as an automated and unbalanced competition advantage. 

27  Case  Murphy  (C-403/09),  the  Court  also  importantly  articulated  for  the  first  time,  in  evaluating  the 
compatibility of the UK law with the freedom to provide services in EU, the view that the specific subject matter 
of  copyrights  to  receive  appropriate  remuneration  for  the  use  of  copyright  work,  not  to  guarantee  the  right 
holders concerned the opportunity to demand the highest possible remuneration. It went further to specify that 
to be appropriate, such remuneration must be reasonable concerning the economic value of the service provided, 
in particular about the actual or potential number of persons who enjoy or wish to enjoy the service, and even 
went as far as admitting that it may be appropriate to request a higher remuneration in the presence of territorial 
exclusivity (Para 108). This principle is now specifically in the recently approved Directive on Copyright in the 
Digital Single Market. Case C.403/08 and C-429/08 joined cases Football Association Premier League Ltd and 
Others v QC Leisure and Others and Karen Murphy v Media Protection Services Ltd.   

40 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii) The core transaction is the interchange of personal services (Digital labor Platforms 

or Gig Economy) 

These platforms conform to what is called the "Gig economy" and are known as "digital labor 

platforms". 

The digital labor platforms can be classified as (A) Leasing-assets-platforms and (B) Labour 

services  platforms.  The  leasing-assets-platforms  are  known  as  the  sharing  economy  (eg. 

Airbnb) while the labor-services-platforms enable that the execution of traditional activities, 

such as transportation, delivery, cleaning, or household services, is channeled through the 

digital platform.   

In turn, the labor-services-platforms can be subdivided as (i) work-on-demand platforms and 

(ii) crowd work-platforms. Work-on-demand platforms refer where the natural person must 

be  close  to  the  final  user  at  the  moment  the  final  user  needs  the  service  (e.g.  Uber,  Lyft, 

TaskRabbit, Handy app, Deliveroo) while crowd work platforms can be web-based (Micro 

tasking crowd work e.g. AMT and Clickworker and Contest-based creative crowd work e.g. 

99designs). 

(iv) The core transaction is to facilitate a digital service 

Some digitals platforms have as is core function facilitate digital services: Financial digital 

services (e.g. Paypal), digital calls (e.g. Zoom), or Internet web search (e.g. Yahoo).  

(v) The core transaction is the digital match in human social relationships  

There are digital platforms that have as is core interaction facilitate human relationships, for 

instance, match personal dates (e.g. Tinder), match friends (e.g. Couchsurfing) or play video 

games.  

41 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(vi) The core transaction is an online price comparison 

There are online platforms that have as is core interaction to make a comparison between the 

prices offer on-line by different firms (e.g. Booking.com).  

(vi) The core transaction is offering an operating system (OS) 

There are digital platforms that have as is core interaction offer an operating system. 

And thus, continually, day by day, entrepreneurs will create a digital platform with different 

core interactions. For instance, a digital platform in which drivers are the only woman. This 

new  digital  platform  will  have  the  effect  of  disintermediating  some  users  of  one  digital 

platform.  

C.  Classification according to with revenue model for access to the inventory  

Digital Platform Firms are profit-making economy agents, so, if economic analysis assumes 

that nothing is for free a price, just the payment is made with a different compensation29.   

Finally,  the  access  for  the  end-users  to  the  digital  platform  inventory  can  have  different 

revenue models:  

a.  Fee-for-content: (e.g. Netflix platform);  

b.  Advertising-supported revenue model (e.g. broadcast  network television and online 

classified as sites);  

c.  Subscription  model:  where  consumers  pay  a  fee  but  also  accept  some  level  of 

advertising (e.g. online newspapers);  

29 In 1776, Adam Smith founder of modern economics and the doctrine of economic liberalism, defined the free 
market economy system with two propositions: The beneficial egoism and the invisible hand. Smith argued that 
the  wealth of a nation is not measured by the number of precious metals it accumulates (as the mercantilist 
asserted), nor by agriculture (as the physiocrats defend), but the wealth of a nation consists of the sum of the 
production of all individuals. If it is to be expected that individuals pledge all their efforts in their business, 
even though not an individual intends to promote the public interest but only taking interest in his gain, promotes 
an end that was not part of his intention: The general welfare. The theory is known as the beneficial egoism, 
briefly in his words: "It is not from the benevolence of the butcher, the brewer, or the baker that we expect our 
dinner, but from their regard to their self-interest. We address ourselves not to their humanity but their self-
love, and never talk to them of our necessities, but of their advantages Adam Smith book.  

42 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
d.  Fee  for  the  transaction:  firm  charge  a  fee  for  each  successful  transaction  carried 

through its platform (e.g. marketplaces); 

e.  Fee-for-service (e.g. financial services); 

f.  Fee for a few: where companies try to attract consumers by providing several digital 

products  for  free  while  tempting  a  small  number  of  consumers  to  buy  a  more 

sophisticated version (e.g. Linked-in). 

The following table shows the classification of digital platform firms according to the core 

transaction and inventory of the digital platform: 

43 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CLASSIFICATION OF DIGITAL PLATFORM FIRM ACCORDING WITH ITS CORE TRANSACTION 

TABLE NO. 2.   

Source: Authors' elaboration. Candidate Master of European and International Business, Competition and Regulatory Law at Freie 

Universität (Berlin).  

44 

No. NAME PLATFORM INVENTORYGROUP 1 GROUP 21Amazon Physical Goods to buy onlineSellersBuyersMarketplace onlineP2P2OLX Physical Goods to buy onlineSellersBuyersMarketplace onlineP2P3Ebay Physical Goods to buy onlineSellersBuyersMarketplace onlineP2P4Tencent Physical Goods to buy onlineSellersBuyersMarketplace onlineP2P5Alibaba Physical Goods to buy onlineSellersBuyersMarketplace onlineP2P6Apple StoreAppsApss developersConsumersApp Marketplace onlineP2P7Google PlayAppsApss developersConsumersApp Marketplace onlineP2P8AwinMarketing onlinePublishersCompaniesMarketing Network onlineP2P9DoubleClickMarketing onlinePublishersCompaniesMarketing Network onlineP2P10OpenEnglish.comEnglish classesEnglish studentsTeacher studentsTeachers online networkP2P11TaskrabbitTransport serviceLocal driversConsumersDrivers online networkP2P12LyftTransport serviceLocal driversConsumersDrivers online networkP2P13Uber, DIDITransport serviceLocal driversConsumersDrivers online networkP2P14AirbnbRoomsLocal roomsConsumersRooms to rent online networkP2P15HandyAppHome worksLocal profesionalsConsumersOnline workers networkP2P16LiferandooFoodLocal restaurantsConsumers of FoodRestaurants online networkP2P17Click-workerMinijobsworkersCompaniesCrowdsourcing P2P18FacebookPhotos and short videos onlineContent providersConsumers of contentSocial online networkP2P19InstagramPhotos and short videos onlineContent providersConsumers of contentSocial online networkP2P20Tik-TokPhotos and short videos onlineContent providersConsumers of contentSocial online networkP2P21SnapchatPhotos and short videos onlineContent providersConsumers of contentSocial online networkP2P22FlickrPhotos and short videos onlineContent providersConsumers of contentSocial online networkP2P23PinterestPhotos and short videos onlineContent providersConsumers of contentContent sharing onlineP2P24TwitterShort text onlineContent providersConsumers of contentSocial online networkP2P25YoutubeVideos onlineContent providersConsumers of contentVideo sharing online platformP2P26RedTubeVideos onlineContent providersConsumers of contentVideo sharing online platformP2P27NetflixMovies video sharingContent providersConsumers of contentVideo sharing online platformP2P28TinderPersonal Dates using InternetPerson PersonPrivate social Network P2P29GrindrPersonal Dates using InternetPerson PersonPrivate social Network P2P30HappnPersonal Dates using InternetPerson PersonPrivate social Network P2P31SoundCloudMusic streaming serviceMusic providersConsumers of musicNetwork music sharing onlineP2P32SpotifyMusic streaming serviceMusic providersConsumers of musicNetwork music sharing onlineP2P33PandoraMusic streaming serviceMusic providersConsumers of musicNetwork music sharing onlineP2P34DeezerMusic streaming serviceMusic providersConsumers of musicNetwork music sharing onlineP2P35TIDALMusic streaming serviceMusic providersConsumers of musicNetwork music sharing onlineP2P36MusicUPMusic streaming serviceMusic providersConsumers of musicNetwork music sharing onlineP2P37NintendoVideo GamesDevelopers video GamesGamersPlatform video gamesP2P38XboxVideo GamesDevelopers video GamesGamersPlatform video gamesP2P39Cloud gamingOnline Video GamesDevelopers video GamesGamersPlatform video gamesP2P40WechatPrivate short text and callsPersonPerson Comunication Services onlineB2C41WhatsAppPrivate short text and callsPersonPerson Comunication Services onlineB2C42ZoomPrivate short text and callsPersonPerson Comunication Services onlineB2C43SkypePrivate short text and callsPersonPerson Comunication Services onlineB2C44PayPalOnline PaymentMerchantsBuyersFinancial services onlineB2C45VisaDigital PaymentMerchantsBuyersFinancial digital NetworkB2C46MasterCardDigital PaymentMerchantsBuyersFinancial digital NetworkB2C47GoogleInternet search enginePersons and machinesOnline informationIndexation of web sitesB2C48BingInternet search enginePersons and machinesOnline informationIndexation of web sitesB2C49Microsoft edgeInternet search enginePersons and machinesOnline informationIndexation of web sitesB2C50YahooInternet search enginePersons and machinesOnline informationIndexation of web sitesB2C51Apple iOSComputer Operating systemOperating systemsConsumersOperating systemsB2C52Android OSComputer Operating systemOperating systemsConsumersOperating systemsB2C53Booking.comHotels rooms HotelsConsumersPrice comparation platformB2C54Shopzillashops price comparisitonshopsConsumersPrice comparation platformB2C55Shopping.comshops price comparisitonshopsConsumersPrice comparation platformB2C56Kayak.comFlytickects prices comparationAirlinesConsumersPrice comparation platformB2C57Google shoppingshops price comparisitonshopsConsumersPrice comparation platformB2C58shoping.comshops price comparisitonshopsConsumersPrice comparation platformB2CCALLSFINANCESEARCHOSCOMPARATIONCLASIFICATIONGIG ECONOMYMARKETPLACESCONTENT SHARINGGAMESMUSICDATES 
 
2.5. THE CYBERNETIC NETWORK OF ECOSYSTEMS  

A.  The cybernetic global network  

Once it has been showing the way  that firms are inverted, one of the consequences is the 

creation of the cybernetic ecosystem. Under this theoretical approach is easier to describe the 

unique  cybernetic  global  network,  as  a  theoretical  concept  of  cybernetic-ecosystems 

interconnected between them, as is showed in the following graphic: 

Figure No. 2.7. The Global Cybernetic Network Ecosystem 

Source: Getty Images 

As  an  analytical  tool,  the  mapping  of  this  global  cybernetic-network  is  just  a  cyber-

ecosystems interconnected between them, where each module is an ecosystem:  

Figure No. 2.8. The Global Cybernetic Network Ecosystem 

Source: Authors' elaboration. Candidate Master of European and International Business, Competition and Regulatory Law at Freie 

Universität (Berlin).  

45 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Under  the  approach  of  a  global  cybernetic-network  economy,  in  the  value  chain  all 

production  firms  (e.g.  agriculture  firms,  cars  manufacturers,  smart-phones  manufacturers, 

etc) are not limited to sell physical goods but to collect information about its consumer and 

the  environment  (e.g.  weather  conditions,  soil  quality)  and  all  firms,  machines,  economy 

agents,  governments,  consumers,  data  clients, 

families,  and  space-satellites  are 

interconnected  between  them  through  the  Internet  network.  In  sum,  under  this  analytical 

approach, will be easier to examine the competitive game of a firm like “Intel” which uses 

more than 19,000 suppliers in over 100 countries to provide direct material and machines to 

consumers around the globe.  

B. The definition of the cybernetic-ecosystem under Competition Law.   

The concept of the "digital ecosystem” has emerged as the dominant idea when describing 

the  competitive  environment  in  the  modern  economy.  Several  authors  and  competition 

authorities have recognized that the ecosystem manager (or ecosystem leader) determines the 

elements of the ecosystem. But most studies of “digital ecosystems” focus on the role of the 

ecosystem as a “hub” of inter-firm relations taking place around a platform. Hence, the point 

is,  under  this  new  analytical  approach,  how  Competition  Law  defines  a  cybernetic-

ecosystem? 

Developed in the early 1990s, the concept of an ecosystem has been defined in broad terms 

as a group of interdependent firms that depend on each other’s activities. Noted that “The 

system being typically reliant on the technological leadership of one or two firms that provide 

a platform around which other system members, providing inputs and complementary goods, 

align their investments and strategies”30.  

Too, ecosystems have been defined as a group of interdependent firms, people, and things 

that share one standardized digital platform for a mutually beneficial purpose. For instance, 

Gartner (2017) defines an ecosystem as “an interdependent group of  enterprises, people 

and/or things that share standardized digital platforms for a mutually beneficial purpose, 

30 Teece paper.  

46 

 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
such as commercial gain, innovation or common interest”. Digital Ecosystems enable you to 

interact with customers, partners, adjacent industries, and even your competition.”31.  

Thus, due to the economy and technical interdependence of the complementary products and 

services  around  the  core  interaction  of  the  digital  platform,  one  of  the  most  noteworthy 

characteristics  is  that  digital  platforms  firms  are  participating  in  several  sectors  of  the 

traditional economy. For instance, the CEPAL report (2018) shows the economic sectors that 

some Digital Platforms Firms were participating in the year 2018, in the following table:  

In this line, for instance, according to a UK report (2020), one of the defining features of 

Googles and Facebook´s firms is that “they have built large “ecosystems” of complementary 

of products and services around their core service”32. And recognized the existence of the 

platform firm ecosystem as it was displayed in its report:  

However, the UK report (2020) continued to apply the traditional approach of the industrial 

economy. And when the “cybernetic-ecosystem” is analyzed under the traditional approach 

of the off-line and online market, competition authorities find it very difficult to analyze the 

competitive game. The questions started being around how to define relevant markets when 

some of the digital platform firms are participating in several different relevant markets. For 

instance,  Google  and  Facebook  platform  firms  are  participating  in  11  relevant  sectors 

according to table No. 3.   

Opposite,  under a new theoretical  approach which  considers the unique  cybernetic  global 

network as a theoretical concept of cybernetic-ecosystems interconnected between them (as 

was showed in the figure No. 2.8 of this work) it will be noted that due to platform firms are 

inverted, a cybernetic ecosystem is built around digital platforms. And the competitive game 

is  about  how  to  expand  this  cybernetic-ecosystem.  This  expansion  means  adding  more 

“components” to the firm´s ecosystem. This is because more components mean more users, 

more  users  mean  more  data  collected,  and  more  data  means  a  better  position  in  the 

31 Gartner.  
32 CMA, Competition, and Markets authority the UK. Online Platforms and digital advertising market study. 
Final Report, 1 July 2020. Page 57. 

47 

 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
competitive  gain  for  the  surplus-value  which  is  created  in  the  economic  system. 

Subsequently, the mapping with an analytical purpose about the competitive game of digital 

platform is a flat map that might look like as the following graphic: 

Figure 2.11. Competition Law analytical mapping  

Source: Authors' elaboration. Candidate Master of European and International Business, Competition and Regulatory Law at Freie 

Universität (Berlin).  

… ∞ 

In that mapping tool, each hexagon is a cyber-component33 of the cybernetic ecosystem 

of a platform firm.  And a cybernetic-ecosystem is defined as a group of interdependent 

cybernetic  components  (persons,  firms,  and  digital  functionalities)  that  share  one 

standardized digital platform for a mutually beneficial purpose. And the cybernetic-

global-network is the cybernetic-ecosystems interconnected between them. 

Finally, under this analytical approach tool, will be easier to examine the competitive game 

of a firm that uses thousands of suppliers in over 100 countries and has consumers around 

the world. And, this is the mapping that will be used in the following chapter to describe the 

approach  which  could  be  implemented  by  Competition  Law  to  analyzed  if  a  conduct 

performed  by  one  platform  firm  is  anticompetitive  or  not.  The  following  chapter  will  be 

explained the way this approach can be plausible use in the current EU Competition Law. 

33 The definition of the cyber-component (each hexagon), or if these components refer only to firms (as economy subjects) 

or digital functionalities, or both at the same time is left open in this work. 

48 

 
 
 
 
                                                           
Too, under this holistic approach, it will be easier the cohesion of law and new brands of the 

economy such as "the complex economy models" which focus on interactions between agents 

and models’ social systems as networks of nodes and ties. However, this work will not be 

based on these new brands which could be very useful. 

According with complex economy, ties act as pipes through which things (e.g. information) 

flow. This brings to the fore the role of networks as spaces of interaction”1. This has important 

implications on the understanding of power relations within systems. For instance, in "small 

worlds"  networks,  where  each  agent  is  first  connected  to  a  set  of  neighboring  agents, 

information can be transmitted between any two nodes using, typically, only a small number 

of connections which shows the crucial role in  the operation of the system  of only  a few 

intermediate nodes. If however, a network is solely composed of neighborhood connections, 

“information must traverse a large number of connections to get from place to place”, thus 

limiting the power/influence of the intermediary nodes. Hence, the position of an agent in a 

network may be a source of advantage and power34. 

34 The Complex Economy.  

49 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
CHAPTER III. 

THE ANALYTICAL APPROACH OF COMPETITION LAW 

RESPECT DIGITAL PLATFORM FIRMS 

In a democratic society law, as a representation of the voice of citizens, Law property rights, 

ensure the enforceability of contracts, allocate liability for harmful activities, impose burdens 

to the economic agents and shape economic markets according to the general interest. 

Competition Law, as a field of Law, has as its goal guarantee competition. Consistent with 

its goal, the function of Competition Law is to punish anticompetitive behavioral conducts 

and  remove  structural  factors  than  impede  effective  competition.  Thus,  Competition  Law 

does  not  punish  an  economic  Dominant  Position  but  sanctioned  the  maintenance  of  a 

Dominant  Position  through  conduct  that  constitutes  unfair  methods  of  competition.  For 

instance,  exclusionary  conducts  which  have  an  appreciable  adverse  effect  on  competition 

(AAEC), agreements between competitors which effect is to restrict competition (e.g. Hard-

Core Cartels, restrictions on sales, anticompetitive parity clauses, and anticompetitive geo-

blocking  practices).  Too,  opposite  of  sector-specific  regulation  (SSR)  which  acts  ex-ante 

behaviors,  Competition  Law  acts  as  a  posteriori  once  a  behavior  is  observed  and  mostly 

relies on the dissuasive power of economic sanctions. At the same time, only in exceptional 

cases where behavioral sanctions are not enough to restore competition, Competition Law 

has  legal  jurisdiction  to  block  Mergers  and  Acquisitions  (M&A)  which  may  lead  to  an 

irreversible  effect  on  Competition.  Also,  in  some  jurisdictions  law  expressly  authorized 

judges to order the divesture of companies in few specific circumstances. 

About digital platform firms’ competition game, there is necessary to differentiate between 

competition between digital platforms firms: (i) Competition inside the ecosystem and (ii) 

Competition  between  platform  firms  (competition  between  ecosystems).  Therefore,  this 

chapter will be divided into two parts referring to this type of competition. But before the 

first part about a structural overview.  

50 

 
 
 
 
 
 
3.1.  COMPETITION LAW STRUCTURAL VIEW OF THE CYBER-

ECOSYSTEM NETWORK   

According to the European Commission public consultation, there are two types of structural 

problems of competition: structural risks for competition and structural lack of competition. 

The  first  one,  structural  risks  for  competition  refers  to  scenarios  where  certain  market 

characteristics and the conduct of the companies operating in the markets create a threat for 

competition.  The  second  one,  structural  lack  of  competition  refers  to  a  scenario  where 

markets are not working well and not delivering competitive outcomes due to its structure 

(e.g.  structural  market  failures).  Also,  under  the  traditional  single  entity  doctrine35, 

Competition Law does not intervene in competitive relationships between components of the 

same legal single unity (The firm).  

However, as it will be explained this approach will not be the correct one to evaluate the 

competitive  game  of  digital  platform  firms  under  Competition  Law.  Consequently,  it  is 

necessary for a different analytical approach, a conceptual redefinition, and other procedural 

tools.  

3.1.1.  COMPETITION AND MONOPOLY  

Competition  Law  does  not  punish  an  economic  Dominant  Position  but  sanctioned  the 

maintenance  of  a  Dominant  Position  through  conduct  that  constitutes  unfair  methods  of 

competition between independent competitors.  

Under  Competition  Law,  competition  is  not  just  about  rivalry  for  everything  or  a 

rivalry  between  firms  for  consumers.  Competition  is  about  the  fair  allocation  of  the 

surplus-value between the different economic agents in economic transactions.  

About production firms, the identification of abuses of a dominant position  and structural 

competitive  concerns  was  based  in  the  investigation  of  market  foreclosure  and  when 

35, Several legal persons may form an economic entity if a control relationship exists between them. 

51 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
determining exploitative abuses more emphasis was put on the consumers:  

Figure 3.1. Illustration of the traditional approach of the concept of Monopoly and Competition 

FORCLOSURE MARKET 

Source: Authors' elaboration. Candidate Master of European and International Business, Competition and Regulatory Law at Freie 

Universität (Berlin).  

Consequently, under the traditional approach, production firms have incentives to foreclosure 

the  market  because  the  foreclosure  means  market  power  and  market  power  means  more 

profits.  This  market  foreclosure  can  be  achieved  by  firms'  anticompetitive  conducts  as 

creating  artificial  entry  barriers,  tying  and  bundling  practices,  exclusivity  agreements,  or 

conducts aimed to lock-in consumers.    

Opposite,  Platform  firms  need  to  expand  their  ecosystem.  To  do  that  need  to  add  new 

components  (e.g.  functionalities  to  its  ecosystem).  The  addition  of  a  new  component 

(hexagon) can have several reasons. For instance, improve the coordination of the ecosystem, 

replace a component which is based on obsolete technology, look for better innovation, a 

new technology compatibility need. But too, this adding can have an anticompetitive effect 

such as avoid competition for the firm (e.g. acquiring a potential firm with a high probability 

of creating competition to the platform firm). 

Figure 3.2.  Illustration of a Merger by a Digital Platform Firm  

52 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Source: Authors' elaboration. Candidate Master of European and International Business, Competition and Regulatory Law at Freie 

Universität (Berlin).  

Platform firms need the expansion of their ecosystem because between more users more Data 

can  be  obtained.  Consequently,  Platform  Firms  are  using  strategies  to  adding  new 

functionalities or components to its Cybernetic-ecosystem36.  

And  contrary  to  natural  resources,  functionalities  are  not  limited,  opposite  the  creative 

capacity of human intelligence is unlimited. So, the adding can consist in add a new module 

that has been created by the platform firm or in the disintegration of a module of another 

cyber-ecosystem to pass to the integration to other cyber-ecosystem.   

Consequently,  structural  competition  can  be  defined  when  there  is  competition  between 

different cyber-ecosystems. Opposite, a Monopoly will be found in the hypothetical situation 

when all the cyber-ecosystems belong to the same platform firm (One Ecosystem). Like in 

the next two figures are displayed:  

36  Examples  of  platform  firms  adding  functionalities  using  mergers  are  Facebook  (WhatsApp,  Instagram), 
Microsoft (Linked-in, Skype, GitHub), and Google (Doubleclick, NetLabs).   

53 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
Figure 3.3. Competition between Digital Platform Firms  

Figure 3.4. Monopoly  

Source: Authors' elaboration. Candidate Master of European and International Business, Competition and Regulatory Law at Freie  

Universität (Berlin).  

Therefore,  monopolization  means  adding  a  new  component  to  the  ecosystem  by 

anticompetitive means (opposite to foreclosure the market by anticompetitive means)37.  

However,  it  would  be  argued  that  platform  firms  need  to  add  more  components  to  their 

ecosystem  or  platform  due  to  better  efficiency,  interoperability,  or  other  technical  and 

economic justifications. And both arguments must be evaluated by Competition Law. 

37 Just like a Lego play (adding blocks). 

54 

 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
In sum, the definition of Monopoly as has been defined for the industrial economy does not 

apply to the cyber-network global ecosystems38.  

3.1.2.  THE LEVERAGING STRATEGY 

Like it was explained in chapter one, the third category of complaints is about the leveraging 

strategy  used  by  platform  firms  to  act  in  different  product  markets,  sometimes  unrelated 

between them. 

Under the traditional approach of market  foreclosure,  This strategy has been perceived as 

problematic  only  if  the  transfer  of  power  from  one  market  to  another  establishes  two 

monopolies that generate two monopoly profits than a single monopoly. For some authors, 

the ability of platform firms to  leverage their  economic power results from  the control of 

resources  such  as  Big  data,  algorithms,  and  Artificial  Intelligence,  on  which  the  new 

economic model depends on. Thus leading to the emergence of a dominant position over a 

dominant social good (information). 

However,  under  the  approach  of  the  platform  business  model,  the  leverage  strategy  is 

something  that  platform  firms  need.  Indeed,  Platform  Firms  need  the  expansion  of  its 

ecosystem because between more users more Data can be obtained. Consequently, Platform 

Firms are using strategies for adding new functionalities or components to their Cybernetic-

ecosystem.  And contrary to  natural  resources,  functionalities  are not  limited, opposite the 

creative capacity of humans is unlimited. And the expansion of the ecosystem may not be 

limited by Competition Law per se.  

Leveraging strategy only can be considered anticompetitive when (a) Adding a new cyber-

component (module) is aimed to finish with a potential rival, (b) When the effect of adding 

the cyber-component to the cyber-ecosystem of the acquirer has an appreciable adverse effect 

38 The size of the monopolies can be different. Too, if the monopoly must be considered in a local, national or 

global perspective must be defined, as well if these monopolies must be defined about a type of Industry, the 

type of data or not, or according to economic transactions. 

55 

 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
 
on competition (AAEC) and (c) When the addition of a new cyber-component is achieved 

through exclusionary or discriminatory conduct.    

3.1.3.  DIGITAL MARKETS ARE PRONE TO TIPPING 

According to European Commission consultation, tipping markets may be considered as a 

structural risk for competition because refers to markets with certain characteristics. and risks 

for  the  competition  can  arise  through  the  creation  of  powerful  market  players  with  an 

entrenched market and/or gatekeeper position, the emergence of which could be prevented 

by early intervention. 

However, like it was explained there  are not  digital markets,  or at  least  is  not  the correct 

terminology. So, can take the approach that the market is prone to tipping.  Moreover, the 

concept of the market must be redefined about the cybernetic-global network. 

Under the new approach, platform firms need to retain the critical points of their ecosystem 

(e.g. Android maps). As making profit firm, these firms have incentives to limit competition. 

For instance, platform firms have incentives to engage in exclusionary practices to control 

the  standard  of  the  network  or  incentives  for  tipping  the  network.    It  must  sound  a  little 

contradictory, but platform firms need to open their ecosystem but retain the critical points. 

In sum, this is about openness and close to the cyber-ecosystem by digital platform firms. 

And which critical points of the ecosystems need to be retained and which has to be opened 

is a crucial point in the platform business model  

In conclusion, the structural competition problems which lead that economic structures are 

not delivering the desired results that must be evaluated under another analytical tool. These 

tools  beyond  the  traditional  theory  of  two-sided  markets.  In  the  new  Competition  Law 

analysis, it must be considered the unique cybernetic-global network, as a theoretical concept 

of cybernetic-ecosystems interconnected between them, where each ecosystem is composed 

of hundreds or thousands of cyber-modules. Thus, the economic relationships of each of these 

modules between them and between these modules and the system leader will be analyzed in 

the following part. 

56 

 
 
 
 
 
 
3.2.  COMPETITION LAW ANALYSIS OF COMPETITION INSIDE 

THE CYBERNETIC NETWORK ECOSYSTEM 

Like  it  was  defined,  a  cybernetic-ecosystem  is  a  group  of  interdependent  cybernetic 

components  (cyber-modules)  that  share  one  standardized  digital  platform.  Consequently, 

competition  game  inside  the  ecosystem  is  about  the  competition  between  the  different 

cybernetic  components  (persons,  firms,  and  digital  functionalities)  that  share  one 

standardized digital platform.  

In the analytical mapping tool, each hexagon is one module of the cyber-ecosystem. These 

modules  can  be  hundred  or  even  millions  in  just  one  ecosystem.  Thus,  the  challenge  is 

identified how to configure each module of the cyber-ecosystem: 

Figure 3.5. Illustration of one cybernetic ecosystem 

Source: Authors' elaboration. Candidate Master of European and International Business, Competition and Regulatory Law at Freie 

Universität (Berlin).  

This work to analyze if one conduct performed inside one ecosystem is anticompetitive will 

consider that each module (hexagon) is a functionality of the cyber-ecosystem.  

3.2.1. DOMINANT POSITION IN THE ECOSYSTEM  

About production firms, the identification of abuses of a dominant position was based in the 

investigation of market foreclosure and when determining exploitative abuses more emphasis 

57 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
was  put  on  the  consumers.  In  this  line,  the  causes  which  are  considered  European 

Commission to determine a dominant position about digital platform firms are: 

CAUSES FOR A DOMINANT POSITION IN MODERN ECONOMY  

TABLE NO. 4 

Source: European Commission public consultation, July 2020. 

However, it must be noticed that article 102 TFEU refers to the terminology of “Dominant 

Position in a Market” and not  “Market power in  the market”. And this terminology has a 

profound meaning.   

58 

1One or few large players on the market.2High degree of vertical integration (scenarios where the same company owns activities at upstream and downstream levels of the suppl chain)3High start-ip costs (e.g. non-recurring costs associated with setting up business)4High Fixed operating costs (e.g. costs that do not change with and increase or decrease in the amount of goods or services produced or sold)5Regulatory barriers (regulatory rules that make market enty or expansion more cumbersome or extensively expensive)6Importance of patents or copyrigths that may prevent entry7Information asymmetry on the customer side (occurs when customers (consumers or businesses) in an economic transaction possess substantially less knowledge than the other par so that they cannot make informed decisions).8High customer switching costs(are one time expenses a consumer or business incurs or the inconvenience it experiences in order to switch over from one product to another or from one service provider to another)9Lack of access to a given input/asset which is necessary to compete on the market (e.g. access to data).10Extreme economies of scale (occur when the cost of producing a product or service decrease as the volume of input increases11Economies of scope (occur when the production of one good or the provision of a service reduces the cost of producing another related good or service).12Strong direct network effects (where network effects are present, the valur of a service increases according to the number of others. using it)13Strong indirect network effects (also known as cross-side effects, typically occur in case of platforms which  link at least two user groups and where the value of a good or service for a user of one group increases according to the number of users of the group)14Customets typicaly use one platform (e.g. they predominantly single-homing and cannot easiy switch).15The platform owner is competing with the business users on the platform (so called dual role situations, for instance the owner of the e-commerce platform that itsel sells on the platform)16Significant financial strenght17Zero-pricing markets (refers to markets in which companies offer therir goods and services to consumers at a zero price and monetize via other means, typically via advertising)18Data dependency (refers to scenarios where the operation of companies are largely based on big datasets) 19Use of pricing algorithms (are automated tools that allow vey frequent changes to prices taking into account all or most competing offers on the market 
 
 
 
Thus, it was to be noticed that according to article 102 TFEU, under EU Competition Law a 

dominant position can be established by market power and by other dominant positions in 

markets. 

Here, is very important to define the meaning of the market. In the Competition Law market 

does not refer exclusively to two-side markets. In a broad definition, the market refers to “a 

set of economic transactions in a place”39. Consequently, in the case of platform firms, the 

dominant position must be considered relative to the cyber-ecosystem.  

Accordingly, it is no doubt that platform firms have control over the ecosystem which was 

built around its digital platform because this cyber-system is built around the digital platform 

infrastructure.  In  other  words,  around  the  digital  platform,  the  system  members  provide 

inputs and complementary goods, align their investments and strategies, sell physical goods, 

or offer personal services. In other words, the dominant position of a digital platform firm 

respect of its cyber-ecosystem must not be probed. Opposite, it must be presumed by law. 

And, in cases in which a digital platform firm lost the dominant position respect its cyber-

ecosystem, is these firms that must prove it.   

3.2.2. ANTICOMPETITIVE CONDUCTS BY A DIGITAL PLATFORM FIRM 

Due  to  the  Dominant  Position  in  its  Cyber-ecosystem,  platform  firms  can  perform 

anticompetitive conducts against members of their Cyber-ecosystem. And this is  the  only 

type  of  conduct  which  are  sanctioned  by  Competition  Law.  In  other  words,  under 

Competition law, other types of conduct which do not constitute an anti-competitive practice 

are not punished (e.g. cyber-crimes or conduct against personal privacy). 

As was explained in the second part, the governance of the ecosystem for the platform firm 

is  necessary  for  the  well-functioning  of  the  ecosystem.  And,  under  Competition  Law, 

platform firms have a special responsibility to preserve competition by creating a fair level 

played field in their Cyber-ecosystems.  

39 Opposite, to the theoretical meaning of the market as the sum of sellers and buyers in a place.   

59 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
In this sense, the Cremer report (EU, 2019) recognized the fact that platforms choose rules 

is not a problem per se because platform firms have incentives to write good rules to make 

their platform more valuable to its users. However, sometimes digital platform could have 

incentives to design the rules in a way which allows it to engage in abusive behavior.  Because 

of its role as self-regulators, platform firms have the responsibility to ensure that their rules 

do not impede free and vigorous competition inside the ecosystem. For instance, a platform 

firm that sets up a marketplace must ensure a level playing field on this marketplace and must 

no use its rule-setting power to determine the outcome of the competition (neutrality).  

Here,  when  analyzed  anticompetitive  conducts,  it  is  necessarily  differentiated  between 

anticompetitive  practices  performed  by  platform  firms  and  anticompetitive  practices 

performed by Production firms, thus:  

CAUSES FOR A DOMINANT POSITION IN MODERN ECONOMY  

TABLE NO. 5 

Source: Authors' elaboration. Candidate Master of European and International Business, Competition and Regulatory Law at Freie 

Universität (Berlin).  

60 

HORIZONTAL COMPETITIONVERTICAL COMPETITION RESPECT OF ITS CYBER-ECOSYSTEM BETWEEN CYBER-ECOSYSTEMS1Exclusion of the market (foreclosure) Exclusion of the market (foreclosure) Exclsuion of the cyber-ecosystemExclsuion of the cyber-ecosystem2online Geo-blocking and Geo-Filtering agremment between competitorsonline Geo-blocking and Geo-Filteringonline Geo-blocking and Geo-Filteringonline Geo-blocking and Geo-Filtering3Agrement of using a Platform Imposing ban of using a Platform Bans and restrictions in its cyber-ecosystem  Bans and restrictions of using other cyber-ecosystem  4Agreements on restrictions on sales on the digital PlatformImposing restrictions on sales on a digital PlatformRestrictions on sales on its digital PlatformRestrictions on sales on other digital Platform5Use of Parity Clauses (MFN) between two producersUse of Parity Clauses (MFN) between producer and distributorsUse of Parity Clauses inside cyber-ecosystemUse of Parity Clauses inside cyber-ecosystem6Discrimination against its competitors Discrimination againsts its suppliers or distributorsInside discrimination in the cyber-ecosystemDiscrimination respect a module of other cyber-ecosystem7Online Price MaintenanceOnline Price MaintenanceOnline Price Maintenance inside cyber-ecosystemOnline Price Maintenance between two cyber-ecosystems8Tacit collusion using online algortihm between competitors which offer its goods in the same platform Tacit Collusion algortihm between modules cyber-ecosystemsTacit Collusion algortihm inside modules cyber-ecosystem9Use of digital price comparation tools Use of digital price comparation tools Use of digital tools for comparation of prices of its digital platform Use of digital tools for comparation of prices of its digital platform 10APPA (acros platform parity agreements between two oferents)APPA (acros platform parity agreements)APPA (acros inter cyber-ecosystem parity agreements)APPA (acros cyber-ecosystems parity agreements)11Refusal to deal to a competitorRefusal to deal to a supplier or distributor Refusal to interoperability to another internal moduleRefusal to interoperability to an external module  ANTICOMPETITIVE CONDUCTS BY PLATFORM FIRMSANTICOMPETITIVE CONDUCTS BY PRODUCTION FIRMS 
 
 
 
 
A. Exclusion of the Cyber-ecosystem by the Platform Firm (system leader)  

As was explained in the second part, the governance and coordination of the cyber-ecosystem 

for the platform firm are necessary for the well-functioning of the cyber-ecosystem. And of 

the  conduct  which  may  help  to  this  function  is  the  exclusion  of  some  components,  for 

instance, modules based on obsolete technology or bad behavior of platform users. 

The exclusion of the cyber-ecosystem consists when the platform firm eliminates or block 

one module of its Cyber-ecosystem, thus: 

Figure 3.6. Exclusion of the cybernetic-ecosystem  

Source: Authors' elaboration. Candidate Master of European and International Business, Competition and Regulatory Law at Freie 

Universität (Berlin). 

For  instance,  a  platform  firm  excludes  one  module  of  its  cyber-ecosystem  because  this 

module rejected to pay the fee which was established publicly for all this type of module (e.g. 

music  providers).  In  this  case,  this  conduct  is  not  anticompetitive.  However,  in  the  cases 

where  the  platform  firm  competes  with  its  modules,  this  conduct  can  be  considered 

anticompetitive. And this is because, without reference to the intention of the exclusion, the 

effect is that without that module in the ecosystem competition is limited.  

In sum, there are several reasons why a digital platform firm can exclude one module of its 

cyber-ecosystem,  for  instance,  because  users  broke  the  rules  or  modules  are  not  more 

functional.  Thus, the exclusion cannot be considered anticompetitive. However, exclusion 

of  the  cyber-ecosystem  can  be  considered  anticompetitive  when  (a)  The  exclusion  of  the 

cyber-component (module or functionality) is aimed to finish with a potential rival (b) The 

61 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
exclusion limit the ability of this module to compete, or (c) When the effect of excluding the 

cyber-component to the cyber-ecosystem has an appreciable adverse effect on competition 

(AAEC). 

B. Discrimination by Platform Firms respect the modules of its cyber-ecosystem 

The  second  anticompetitive  behavior  which  can  be  performed  by  a  Platform  firm  is 

discrimination against a module of its cyber-ecosystem (internal). Also, platform firms can 

be discrimination against a module which is part of another its cyber-ecosystem, (external), 

thus:    

Figure 3.7. Exclusion of the cybernetic-ecosystem  

Source: Authors' elaboration. Candidate Master of European and International Business, Competition and Regulatory Law at Freie 

Universität (Berlin). 

Similarly, discrimination can be based on several justifications, so cannot be considered anti-

competitive,  per  se.  (e.g.  objective  and  publicly  different  prices  depending  on  the  type 

module or transaction). 

But in some cases, for instance, when platform firms configured the technical infrastructure 

of the digital platform in favor of the products which own and against other platform users 

which compete directly with these products, this conduct is anticompetitive.   

For instance, the European Commission case against Amazon for using data on its third-party 

merchant's40. The idea is to address the dual role of the e-commerce giant, given that it hosts 

40 Case European Commission against Amazon.  

62 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
but also competes against these other merchants. There are concerns that Amazon's platform 

firm could be using sensitive information about its competitors to its advantage. According 

to the terms and conditions, business users needed, for example, to assign the right to use the 

information material which a seller has to provide regarding the products offered on pan-

European despatch41.  

In sum,  internal  or  external  discrimination  performed by a platform firm  using its  Cyber-

ecosystem  can  be  considered  anticompetitive  when  (a)  The  conduct  is  aimed  to  finish  a 

potential rival; (b) The discrimination limit the ability of the module to compete, or (c) When 

the discrimination has an appreciable adverse effect on competition (AAEC). 

3.3.  COMPETITION  LAW  ANALYSIS  OF  COMPETITION 

BETWEEN CYBER-ECOSYSTEMS 

Here, the conduct implies two or more cyber-ecosystems. This type of conducts involves 

anticompetitive agreements between two or more platform firms and unilateral actions of 

one platform firm using its Cyber-ecosystem against other firm.   

A.  Deny interoperability  

Under a new theoretical approach that considers the unique cybernetic global network as a 

theoretical concept of cybernetic-ecosystems interconnected between them (as was shown in 

figure No. 2.8), it will be noted that interoperability is a key factor for the well-functioning 

of the global-cybernetic ecosystem.  

Technological interoperability implies using the same technological standards, language, or 

to  make  different  languages  interoperate.  Indeed,  interoperability  is  the  leading  focus  for 

upholding  competition  in  the  global-cybernetic  ecosystem.  Consequently,  when  a  digital 

platform firm denies interoperability is their responsibility to justify the reason. For instance, 

it is a legal reason to deny the interoperability of a module of its cyber-ecosystem to another 

41 Case German Competition authority against Amazon. 

63 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
cyber-ecosystem because this is managed by cyber-criminals. In this case, Competition Law 

cannot force interoperability. 

                   Figure 3.8. Deny Interoperability to a module of other cyber-ecosystem 

Source: Authors' elaboration. Candidate Master of European and International Business, Competition and Regulatory Law at Freie 

Universität (Berlin). 

However,  in  cases  where  a  platform  firm  denies  the  interoperability  of  a  module  with  its 

Cyber-ecosystem and this conduct ahve the effect of decrease the ability of a competitor to 

compete or when this generation has an appreciable adverse effect on competition (AAEC), 

this conduct must be sanctioned under Competition Law. 

This  conduct  is  especially  important  in  the  case  of  interoperability  to  APIs  (Private 

application programming interfaces) because cyber-ecosystems are connected through APIs 

which connected the services. Do not bring granted access to private APIs implies the risk of 

exclusion from access to the Cyber-ecosystem. Too, concerning standards interoperability 

(SEPs) and protocols interoperability (ensures that two systems can fully work together and 

that complementary services can be provided).   

Due to the need for interoperability between cyber-ecosystems, there is a need that this type 

of  conduct  must  be  evaluated  by  Competition  law  in  an  agile  legal  procedure  way.  One 

solution must be granting the right of interoperability between cyber-ecosystems and at the 

moment which a platform firm denied this interoperability the burden pf the proof for this 

denegation must be in the head of the platform firm. And not like today where competition 

authorities must to prove that interoperability is an abuse of dominant position. 

64 

 
 
 
 
 
 
2.3.4.  Parity Clauses between two cyber-ecosystems  

The parity clauses have been found to soften competition between cyber-ecosystems, 

leading to increased platform-sellers’ prices.   

Figure 3.8. Deny Interoperability to a module of other cyber-ecosystem 

Source: Authors' elaboration. Candidate Master of European and International Business, Competition and Regulatory Law at Freie 

Universität (Berlin). 

However, the analysis of parity clauses must be different when are used by the platform firms 

(e.g. marketplace) and when these clauses are used by the sellers which used the marketplace.  

A platform firm has the incentive to improve the quantity of the transactions while the sellers 

have incentives to increase prices. 

65 

 
 
 
 
 
 
