Comments on the European Commission’s Consultation on a Possible New 
Competition Tool 

September 2020 

The U.S. Chamber of Commerce welcomes the opportunity to provide the 

European Commission with comments on its proposed new competition tool.  

The U.S. Chamber of Commerce (“Chamber”) is the world’s largest business 

federation, representing the interests of more than three million enterprises of all sizes 
and sectors. The Chamber is a longtime advocate for strong commercial ties between 
the United States and the European Union. According to a recent Chamber study 
jointly commissioned with AmCham EU, the U.S. and EU are jointly responsible for 
more than one-third of global gross domestic product, and transatlantic trade and 
investment supports 16 million jobs on both sides of the Atlantic.1 The Chamber is 
also a leading business voice on digital economy policy, including on issues of data 
privacy, cross-border data flows, cybersecurity, digital trade, artificial intelligence, and 
e-commerce. In the U.S. and globally, we support sound policy frameworks that 
promote data protection, support economic growth, and foster innovation.2  

Introduction 

As the Commission considers updates and revisions to its digital regulatory 

framework, the Chamber recognizes and appreciates policymakers’ emphasis on 
deepening and strengthening the fundamentals of the European digital economy. In 
light of the COVID-19 pandemic and ensuing economic lockdowns, digital services 
have proven even more essential than before to the continuity of business, 
policymaking, communication, and commerce. It is essential that Europe’s approach 
to digital policy be done in a way that unleashes the full potential of Europe’s digital 
economy, not as a tool for industrial policy to target certain firms or build national 
champions.  

1 U.S. Chamber of Commerce & AmCham EU, The Transatlantic Economy 2020. 
2 U.S. Chamber of Commerce, Data Privacy. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Central to informing and shaping the Commission’s digital regulatory plans are 

parallel consultations regarding an ex-ante regulatory approach to “gatekeepers” as 
part of the Digital Services Act (DSA) and consideration as to whether there is a need 
for new measures in the EU’s competition toolkit. That Chamber is filing comments 
to both consultations. These comments largely mirror what we have filed as part of 
the DSA consultation, but our DSA consultation addressed other issues, such as 
content moderation, that are not tied the DSA consideration of an ex-ante tool.  

Addressing Possible ex-ante Rules for “Gatekeeper” Platforms  

Targeting so-called gatekeeper platforms, without providing clear guidance as 
to how the term “gatekeeper” will ultimately be defined is the first of many problems 
with both of these consultations. It seems that the Commission considers gatekeepers 
to somehow be major inhibitors of competition and innovation, without concrete 
evidence of market failure. This assumption is counter-intuitive since, by any 
definition, a “gatekeeper” would have to have been itself a major innovator to achieve 
the relative level of success that it has earned in the market. Further, it is a core tenet 
of competition that a competitor generally has the right to set the terms by which it 
deals with rivals.   

Further, platforms are not “gatekeepers” but serve as “bridge builders,” since 

the platforms they operate are often the easiest and most direct ways for other 
innovative companies of all sizes—regardless of national origin—to connect with 
clients, customers, and new markets, be they across town or across continents. 
European companies are major beneficiaries of the tremendous market access these 
platforms facilitate. It is also worth noting that Europe is the world’s leading exporter 
of services globally. Putting up new roadblocks to the operations of major platforms 
in Europe would disincentivize their continued investments across the EU. 

Recent comments from some prominent EU officials raise concerns about 

efforts to specifically target American firms with proposed “gatekeeper” regulations. 
It is reasonable to expect that any overt discrimination would create friction in an 
already at times strained U.S.-EU relationship. In short, the proposed DSA, and 
indeed any proposal for competition law reform in Europe must: avoid industrial 
policy motivation; not result in discriminatory treatment that gives rise to national 
treatment violations; and be rooted in sound, transparent, and justifiable grounds.    

Further, if, the Commission were to adopt an arbitrary measure—such as the 

number of users or the geographic coverage within the EU, for example—as a 
threshold to impose burdensome new regulations on firms, there will be myriad 
unintended consequences. First, such an approach would punish innovation as 

2 

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
companies endeavor to stay beneath any threshold in order to avoid new compliance 
costs. Secondly, it is not clear that such an approach would conform with the good 
regulatory practices principles the EU has long espoused. Most importantly, an 
arbitrary measure that screens out virtually all but a few foreign companies would face 
a very high bar for justification that such an approach does not violate the EU’s core 
trade obligations. A far better approach would be to identify specific market failures 
and design regulatory responses to account for them. 

If the Commission ultimately decides to pursue implementing an ex ante 

regulatory instrument, it should identify platforms based on qualitative rather than 
quantitative data, such as: the impossibility, or at least the difficulty, for users to multi-
home (to use different platforms for similar purposes). As long as consumers can 
multi-home, it is unlikely any platform will hold sufficient “gatekeeping” power. 
When users multi-home, there is no risk of anticompetitive foreclosure of competitors 
because the consumer can use other sites and platforms to obtain similar services.  

On the contrary, we consider that the following criteria are not relevant to 

defining a gatekeeper: 

•  A wide geographic coverage across the EU market: platforms can serve 

as gatekeepers in a national or local market due to cultural preferences or 
language; and 

•  Leveraging assets for entering new areas of activity: to enter into a new 
market by developing innovative products and services is pure market-
based competition on the merits. Furthermore, this practice is not 
exclusive to online platforms.  

Competition Policy 

The Commission is simultaneously considering an expanded competition policy 
toolkit in order to address the same set of “concerns” through ex-ante regulation. The 
Chamber has repeatedly raised concerns about the EU’s approach to competition 
enforcement and the open-ended nature of its law. The Chamber is concerned that 
the proposed changes to the EU competition law framework will only exacerbate 
these concerns. Despite explicitly embracing a "more economic" approach in its 
enforcement over a decade ago, the Chamber feels that European competition 
enforcement continues to place insufficient reliance on robust economic analysis. For 
example, European competition law can impose a special responsibility on dominant 
firms even where that dominance has been achieved in the market as a result of merit-
based competition. In short, the Chamber is concerned that there is a tendency under 
existing EU competition law to place the protection of competitors above that of the 

3 

 
 
 
 
 
 
competitive process (and ultimately consumer welfare) at the expense of innovative 
and success earned in the market. 

Europe’s existing competition toolkit is arguably stronger than such measures 

elsewhere in the world, save for those countries that have explicitly embedded 
industrial policy motivations into their antitrust laws. For this reason, it is nearly 
impossible to imagine why one would need to further strengthen EU competition law 
and its corresponding enforcement powers, other than to further a political agenda. 
The existing EU competition toolkit is sufficiently robust to address myriad theories 
of harm that are enforceable under a European view of antitrust, including any 
potentially problematic conduct by large digital players. There is no shortage of 
prominent cases in which the Commission has targeted digital companies for 
perceived antitrust violations, and any discussion should not be over the reach of the 
law, but over the appropriate and ultimately effective behavioral remedies.   

If, the Commission is concerned that it will not be able to intervene sufficiently 

swiftly to effectively protect competition, the Broadcom case shows that the existing 
toolbox enables the Commission to intervene quickly through the use of interim 
measures. Additionally, the consideration of a new competition tool appears to target 
exclusively—or to a very substantial extent—single firm conduct, but without 
providing the substantive and procedural safeguards enshrined in Article 102 TFEU 
by empowering the Commission to impose remedies without having to find any 
infringement. Beyond serious due process concerns with such an approach, it also 
could create a perverse incentive to bring cases under the new competition tool, 
instead of Article 102 TFEU. 

In short, Europe’s competition toolkit already holds immense power to direct 

outcomes in the market. Its focus is more targeted than any sweeping ex-ante 
regulation (assuming one could be drafted to steer clear of trade violations) and is 
directed at a firm to address an anti-competitive concern, not to govern an entire 
industry or sector. By contrast, ex-ante regulatory measures can often chill both 
innovation and competition in the market. 

Promoting Coordination, not Confrontation 

Representing companies that are heavily invested in Europe, and for whom the 

EU represents a major market, the Chamber shares the Commission’s goals of 
advancing the European digital economy, building digital skills, and deepening 
Europe’s market for digital services. Our member companies are invested in these 
broad goals because they thrive as the EU’s economy thrives. At the same time, some 
policymakers have openly described Europe’s ambitions in terms of “technological 

4 

 
 
 
 
 
 
sovereignty,” and this is cause for concern. While our member companies understand 
that there is an ambition for Europe to drive further European innovation, implicit in 
these comments is an apparent desire to target large U.S. technology companies. This 
perspective is particularly problematic, coming at a time when we face growing 
challenges from other market players who do not share our values. The EU and the 
U.S. have an opportunity to instead work collaboratively to address these issues and 
to foster growth for the broader transatlantic digital economy. 

We welcome a strategy designed to strengthen Europe’s digital market, but 

caution against a protectionist approach focused on advancing national champions or 
discriminating against others based on the location of their headquarters. Europe’s 
future competitiveness depends on maintaining its commitment to openness—rather 
than raising artificial barriers against select companies, or by punishing success. 

Given the need for investment and capacity building to create opportunity and 

jobs, we encourage the EU to pursue a policy of “technological resilience.” Such an 
approach would emphasize cooperation with like-minded partners, including the 
private sector, on measures that promote traditional European and American values 
such as support for open markets, respect for the rule of law, data protection and 
privacy, and ensuring individual rights are protected. 

Conclusion 

The U.S. business community is proud of its longstanding and significant 

contributions to the transatlantic commercial relationship and to Europe’s thriving 
digital economy, and companies are eager to help Europe strengthen its digital 
economy still further.  The Chamber appreciates the opportunity to share these 
comments, and we look forward to continuing our constructive engagement with the 
Commission to drive that future success.  

Contact: 
Garrett Workman 
Senior Director of European Affairs 
gworkman@uschamber.com 
+1 202-503-7522 
EU Transparency Register: 483024821178-51 

5 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
