ISFE Position Paper on proposed New Competition Tool 

Transparency Register ID Number: 20586492362-11 

September 2020 

About ISFE 

1.  ISFE represents the video games industry in Europe and is based in Brussels, Belgium. 
Our membership comprises national trade associations in 18 countries across Europe 
which represent in turn thousands of video games developers and publishers at 
national level. ISFE also has as direct members the leading European and international 
video games companies, many of which have studios with a strong European footprint, 
that produce and publish interactive entertainment and educational software for use 
on personal computers, game consoles, portable devices, mobile phones and tablets.   

2.  ISFE’s purpose is to serve Europe’s video games ecosystem by ensuring that the value of 
games is widely understood and to promote growth, skills, and innovation policies that 
are vital to strengthen the sector’s contribution to Europe’s digital future. The video 
games sector represents one of Europe’s most compelling economic success stories, 
relying on a strong IP framework, and is a rapidly growing segment of the creative 
industries. In 2019, Europe’s video games industry was worth over €21bn, and the 
industry has registered a growth rate of 55% over the past 5 years in key European 
markets1. 

3.  Video games have a proven ability to successfully drive new business models. Digital 
transformation with the growth of online and app-based gaming accounts today for 
76% of the industry’s European revenues. Via the emergence of on-demand and 
streaming services and the launch of new high-performance consoles, together with the 
strong growth of mobile gaming, the industry offers players across Europe and in all age 
groups the possibility to enjoy and engage with video games. Today, 51% of Europe’s 
population plays video games, which is approximately 250 million people, and 45% of 
the players are women.  

The proposed New Competition Tool 

4.  We believe that the current competition toolbox has provided a reliable and consistent 
framework that enforcers have been able to apply effectively across all sectors. Any 

1 ISFE Key Facts 2020 from GameTrack Data by Ipsos MORI and commissioned by ISFE 
https://www.isfe.eu/isfe-key-facts/.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
move away from the principles of this framework should, in our view, only be 
considered with extreme caution.  

5.  The proposed new competition tool (NCT) will bring about what has been described as 
“a paradigm shift” in EU competition policy enforcement. However, we remain to be 
convinced that a compelling case has been made that such a tool is necessary or that 
the existing tools cannot address the perceived enforcement gap. The Commission’s 
proposals clearly have the potential to hugely expand regulatory control over markets 
in general, and over certain businesses in particular, for reasons that are completely 
unconnected to breaches of competition law. We believe that there is a very real risk 
that the proposed NCT could create legal uncertainty, limit development and 
innovation, and have a chilling effect on the competitiveness of many companies 
(including European ones) in what are ever evolving and innovative markets. 

6.  An additional concern for our member companies would be the potential impact of a 
new power to force companies to stop consumer-friendly and efficient behaviours, or 
to divest strategic assets, in the absence of any tangible and palpable market 
foreclosure, giving rise to the potential for material consumer harm. The video games 
industry is a consumer/player first sector and we would urge the Commission to give 
careful consideration to the possible detrimental impact on consumers of an NCT. 

7.  We also believe that an NCT should not be used to circumvent the evidentiary 

standards and procedural safeguards applicable in relation to Articles 101 and 102 TFEU 
or the jurisprudence of the CJEU. Furthermore, we think that the relationship between 
an NCT and the ex ante regulatory instrument for large gatekeeper platforms that is 
part of the DSA package will need to be very carefully managed to avoid fragmentation 
and to guarantee legal certainty. In addition, clarity on the legal test for intervention by 
the Commission will be essential to safeguard the rule of law and to ensure that 
companies enjoy the requisite legal certainty that is currently provided by Articles 101 
and 102 TFEU. The rules relating to any NCT must also ensure that there is a clearly 
defined evidential bar for the imposition of remedies, and should adopt an effects-
based approach, ensuring that any remedies imposed are absolutely necessary, 
proportionate, properly designed and capable of addressing any perceived issues.  

8.  The Commission has stated that the legal basis for an NCT is Article 103 TFEU in 

combination with Article 114 TFEU. However, we wonder if this is really sufficient to 
support the Commission’s proposals and fear that it might raise questions about the 
initiative’s constitutionality. Article 103 TFEU enables the adoption of legislation to 
“give effect to the principles set out in Articles 101 and 102” and to address restrictions 
of competition. The NCT, on the other hand, appears to be aimed at creating new 
competition, “without any prior finding of an infringement” of Articles 101 or 102 TFEU. 
Furthermore, there does not appear to be any need for the approximation of divergent 
national laws via the NCT pursuant to Article 114 TFEU.  

9.  The Commission appears to be relying on the fact that some jurisdictions (in particular 
the UK) already have a pro-competition tool which can be used without needing to find 
any infringement of competition law (e.g. the UK market investigation 
regime).  However, what may be appropriate in the UK may not necessarily work for the 
Commission across the EU. Structural differences are relevant. The UK market 
investigation regime is a two-stage process – with two separate panels carrying out 

 
 
 
 
 
independent reviews. There is a lot of rigour and scrutiny in the process. The panel 
members have diverse backgrounds which helps to avoid problems of “group think”.  If 
the Commission does eventually adopt such a tool, we would argue that the same 
procedural and structural safeguards as exist in the UK (such as strong judicial review) 
should be implemented in the EU. After all, companies that have committed no 
infringement and that may be operating perfectly legally, could stand to have remedies 
imposed on them that can go so far as to require forced divestitures. 

10. Furthermore, UK market investigations can have a serious impact on affected 

companies, and significant personnel and data resources typically have to be dedicated 
to engaging with investigating authorities (with the whole process usually taking over 
two years). Many consider that such investigations rarely result in pro-competitive 
outcomes that are proportionate to the time and expense involved and that companies 
are often left with little recourse to assert their rights of defence. 

11. If an extension of the Commission’s tools and powers is eventually implemented, then: 
(a) any potential intervention will need to be carefully considered, and held to be 
objectively justified and proportionate - new investigatory and enforcement powers can 
have a detrimental impact on competition in markets, and particularly in digital markets 
which are often fast moving and where any reduction in competition or chilling effect 
on innovation can be very hard to undo; (b) the powers will need to be exercised with 
effective oversight; and (c) companies in markets subject to these new powers should 
not be overburdened when responding to such actions and will need to be given proper 
rights of defence and appeal. 

ISFE Secretariat, September 2020 

INTERACTIVE SOFTWARE FEDERATION OF EUROPE aisbl. 
Rue Guimard 15 | 1040 Brussels | Belgium  
T +32 2 612 17 78 | info@isfe.eu | www.isfe.eu 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
