Ref. Ares(2020)4723072 - 09/09/2020

8 September 2020 

Lawyers at  
Linklaters 

In cooperation with 

Economists at 
Compass Lexecon  

Response to the European Commission’s Consultation  

on a ‘New Competition Tool’  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1 

INTRODUCTION AND EXECUTIVE SUMMARY ...................................................................... 1 

2  EVALUATING THE ISSUES WHICH THE NCT SEEKS TO ADDRESS (Q8 – Q18) .............. 3 

INTRODUCTION ...................................................................................................................... 3 
2.1 
2.2  REPEATED LEVERAGING STRATEGIES (Q8) ............................................................................. 5 
2.3  MONOPOLISATION (Q10) ....................................................................................................... 6 
2.4  OLIGOPOLISTIC MARKETS / TACIT COLLUSION (Q12) ............................................................... 7 
2.5  AI AND TACIT COLLUSION (Q14) ............................................................................................ 8 
2.6 
TIPPING MARKETS (Q16) ..................................................................................................... 10 
2.7  GATEKEEPERS (Q18) .......................................................................................................... 11 

3  SUITABILITY OF EXISTING RULES AND THE NCT POLICY OPTIONS TO ADDRESS 
CONCERNS .................................................................................................................................... 12 

3.1  REPEATED LEVERAGING STRATEGIES AND MONOPOLISATION (Q9 / Q11)............................... 12 
3.2  OLIGOPOLY AND TACIT COLLUSION (INCLUDING AI/ALGORITHMIC COLLUSION) (Q13 / Q15) .... 15 
TIPPING MARKETS AND GATEKEEPER SCENARIOS (Q17 / Q19) ............................................. 17 
3.3 
THE MOST SUITABLE POLICY OPTION TO ADDRESS THE IDENTIFIED CONCERNS ....................... 19 
3.4 

4  WHAT THIS MEANS FOR THE SCOPE OF THE NCT .......................................................... 21 

4.1  CONSUMER PROTECTION VS COMPETITION ISSUES ................................................................ 21 
4.2  PRIVATE AND PUBLIC CONCERNS ......................................................................................... 23 
4.3  PRELIMINARY CONCLUSIONS ................................................................................................ 24 

5  THE NEED FOR CONSISTENCY (Q25 AND Q29) ................................................................ 24 

THE BENEFITS OF CONSISTENCY FOR EU COMPETITION POLICY ............................................. 25 
5.1 
5.2  WEAK CASE FOR WHY CONSISTENCY IS NOT NECESSARY FOR THE NCT................................. 25 
5.3  CONSISTENCY BETWEEN THE NCT AND THE COMMISSION’S EXISTING ANTITRUST TOOLS ....... 27 

6  REMEDIES (Q30 – Q34, Q36, Q38) ........................................................................................ 28 

6.1 
THE NEED TO IDENTIFY A REMEDY THAT ADDRESSES THE COMPETITION CONCERNS EARLY ON IN 
THE PROCESS ................................................................................................................................ 29 
6.2  SCOPE OF REMEDIAL POWERS (Q30 – 34) ........................................................................... 31 
THE NEED FOR PROPORTIONALITY (Q31).............................................................................. 33 
6.3 

7  PROCEDURAL SAFEGUARDS (Q33 – Q38) ........................................................................ 35 

7.1 
INVESTIGATIVE POWERS UNDER NCT (Q33) ......................................................................... 35 
7.2  SAFEGUARDS ON INVESTIGATIVE POWERS ............................................................................ 36 
TIMING SAFEGUARD (Q34) .................................................................................................. 37 
7.3 
7.4  SEPARATION OF POWERS (Q37 – Q38) ................................................................................ 37 

8 

JUDICIAL OVERSIGHT (Q39) ................................................................................................ 38 

9  LEGAL BASE .......................................................................................................................... 40 

ii 

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1 

Introduction and Executive Summary 

Lawyers at Linklaters1 in cooperation with economists at Compass Lexecon2 greatly appreciate the 
opportunity to participate in the public consultation (the “Consultation”) launched by the European 
Commission (the “Commission”) on a proposed New Competition Tool (“NCT”). 

The introduction of the NCT would be the most significant structural reform to the EU’s competition 
powers since the introduction of the EU merger regulation in 1989.3 As such, it raises a number of 
fundamental institutional, legal, economic and policy questions. Indeed, whereas the existing rules 
focus on intervening to prevent proscribed anti-competitive conduct, the tool is intended to change 
the ‘rules of the game’ to reinforce competition in markets in which competition is not working well 
or in markets prone to competitive harm before anti-competitive conduct occurs. 

In  this  paper,  we  explain  our  views  on  the  NCT.  Rather  than  addressing  all  of  the  questions  the 
Commission  puts  forward  in  its  questionnaire,  we  have  opted  to  focus  in  more  detail  on  a  more 
limited  number  of  fundamental questions that the NCT poses in  our view. These are intended to 
illustrate and explain our principal thesis, which is that we believe introducing a new competition tool 
could provide the Commission with a valuable tool to promote competition, provided that sufficient 
substantive and procedural safeguards are put in place.   

The structure of this paper is as follows. Section 2 provides an assessment of the issues which the 
NCT  is  intended  to  address.  Drawing  on  this  analysis,  Section  3  provides  an  evaluation  of  the 
suitability of the policy options (including existing competition rules) to address those concerns. After 
concluding that a broad NCT is most appropriate, Section 4 then discusses the outer limits of this 
option  and  the  problems  it  may  not  be  suited  to  address.  Section  5  considers  the  legal  test 
underpinning the NCT and the need for consistency and coherency with the existing competition law 
framework. Section 6 addresses the remedial powers of the NCT. Section 7 outlines the need for 
adequate procedural safeguards and what that may entail. Section 8 discusses the importance of 
effective  judicial  oversight  of  the  NCT  and  Section  9  concludes  with  an  assessment  of  the 
appropriate legal base for the NCT.  

In summary, our views are: 

 

 

Based  on  an  assessment  of  various  issues,  we  conclude  that  there  are  gaps  in  existing 
competition  law  that  could  be  addressed  with  an  NCT  focused  on  promoting  competition, 
rather than dealing solely with anti-competitive conduct.   

To address these issues, we believe that a market structure-based instrument (Options 3 and 
4)  is  the  more  appropriate  tool,  as  it  would  allow  for  market-wide  remedies  which  may  be 
useful to address both unilateral conduct and structural competition problems. There are also 
good reasons why the tool should not be limited to certain sectors, notably that the boundaries 
between the “digital sector” and other sectors would be very difficult to define in advance.  

1  The Linklaters authors of this response are Christian Ahlborn, Fredrik Lowhagen, Helen Crossley, William Leslie, Lodewick 
Prompers, and Eoin O’Reilly. The views expressed here are their own and cannot be assumed to represent the views of 
other lawyers at Linklaters or any clients of Linklaters. 

2  The Compass Lexecon authors of this response are John Davies, Miguel de la Mano, Guillaume Duquesne and Rameet 
Sangha.  The views  expressed  here  are  their  own  and  cannot  be  assumed  to  represent  the  views  of  other  experts  at 
Compass Lexecon, the firm itself or any of its clients.  

3  See e.g. Pablo Ibáñez Colomo, ‘My Feedback on the New Competition Tool’ (Chillin’Competition, 30 June 2020) available 
here  accessed  7  September  2020;  BEUC,  Digital  Services  Act  (ex-ante  rules)  and  New  Competition  Tool  -  BEUC 
contribution  to  the  Roadmaps  (BEUC-X-2020-059,  30  June  2020)  available  here  accessed  7  September  2020;  Matt 
Allison,  Vodafone  Group  feedback  to  the  Commission’s  Consultation  (30  June  2020)  available  here  accessed  7 
September 2020; Council Regulation (EEC) No 4064/89 of 21 December 1989 on the control of concentrations between 
undertakings [1989] OJ L395/1.  

1 

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

However,  the  effectiveness  of  such  a  tool  will  critically  depend  upon  designing  the  system 
properly.  There  would  need  to  be  a  clear  mandate  and  protection  from  the  relevant 
safeguards: 

o  Scope:  The  NCT  should  be  designed  to  protect  the  integrity  of  the  competitive 
process,  not  to  pursue  issues  of  consumer  protection.  It should  not  be  considered 
broadly as a ‘market failure tool’, conferring the ability to intervene in markets where 
they are working poorly – for any reason.  Whether competition policy is the right tool 
to  address  a  market  failure  depends  on  whether  there  is  a  problem  with  the 
competitive process, and whether this can be successfully addressed by intervening 
to fix the competitive process. However, if the objective of the NCT is to fully address 
“structural  competition  problems”,  the  Commission  should  be  able  to  address 
concerns regardless of whether they stem from private or public conduct. 

o  Consistency: The NCT should adhere to a legal standard for intervention consistent 
with the application of Articles 101 and 102 TFEU. Failure to ensure consistency with 
these  existing  provisions  would,  in  practical  terms,  allow  the  NCT  to  be  used  to 
circumvent the application of the existing competition rules, potentially undermining 
decades  of  accumulated  practice  and  jurisprudence.  While  the  fact  that  the  NCT 
would not result in the imposition of fines may allow more flexibility to create a new 
precedent,  this  does  not  mean  that  the  rules  set  down  by  existing  provisions  and 
cases can be ignored. Importantly, there is a need for a priority rule to set out in what 
circumstances  the  NCT  should  apply.  This  requires  a  clear  and  predictable  set  of 
rules which dictates which of the legal tools – the NCT or existing rules – is applicable. 

o  Remedies: Plausible remedies should be identified early in the investigative process. 
This allows the Commission to define the correct counterfactual and make a proper 
competitive assessment, and also ensures that investigations are not pursued where 
there is no plausible competition remedy. Remedies must be proportionate and must 
address the competitive process: where the Commission is unable to do so, it should 
not have broad powers to impose, for example, industry price regulation. 

o  Procedural  safeguards:  The  process  must  safeguard  the  rights  of  defence  and 
ensure the powers under the NCT are not misused. The NCT should follow a two-
stage process with clear legal tests for opening an investigation and pursuing an in-
depth investigation, to avoid lengthy investigations without a clearly defined theory of 
harm  or  suitable  remedies.  Strict  legal  deadlines  for  each  phase  should  apply. 
Moreover,  affected  parties  should  be  provided  with  the  opportunity  to  make 
submissions  (both  in  writing  and  at  hearings)  on  provisional  findings  concerning 
substantive  issues  and  remedies.  Indeed,  the  NCT  provides  an  opportunity  to 
strengthen the oral hearing safeguard, which has been criticised in the past as not 
sufficiently engaging key decision-makers (and as a result, the affected parties).  

o  Judicial  review:  clear  and  judiciable  legal  tests  must  permit  affected  parties  to 
challenge the findings of the Commission and enable the EU Courts to carry out a 
review of similar scope and intensity to decisions under existing competition tools. 

o  Legal  basis:  In  our  view,  it  is  doubtful  whether  Article  103  TFEU  constitutes  an 
appropriate  legal  basis  for  the  adoption  of  the  NCT.  Article  103  TFEU  refers  to 
legislation  “giving  effect  to  the  principles  set  out  in  Articles  101  and  102  TFEU”. 
However, a distinguishing feature of the NCT, particularly so in respect of the market 
structure-based Options 3 and 4, is that this tool would be detached from the discrete 
treaty prohibitions set out in those articles. 

2 

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 

Evaluating the issues which the NCT seeks to address (Q8 – Q18)  

2.1 

Introduction 

This section sets out the various possible competition concerns identified by the Commission under 
Questions 8 to 18 of the Consultation. These are repeated leveraging strategies, monopolisation, 
oligopolistic markets and tacit collusion (including algorithmic tacit collusion), tipping markets and 
gatekeeper scenarios. 

In each case, we  describe the underlying economics of the  topic, with a  particular focus on how 
economic harm might arise (primarily to consumers) as a result of failures of competition.  We focus 
on  where  the  gaps  may  arise  within  the  existing  framework  of  competition  law,  although  a  full 
evaluation of whether new tools are needed to address these concerns is left for the subsequent 
Section 3.  

Gaps left by the enforcement of Article 102 TFEU? 

For most of these issues, the obvious existing instrument is Article 102 TFEU (although Article 101 
TFEU is also relevant, especially for the assessment of tacit collusion, as we discuss).  A ‘gap’ in the 
enforcement of Article 102 TFEU could presumably arise in one or other of the following situations: 

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

(d) 

Where the evidence is insufficiently conclusive to support a finding of abuse of dominance 
under Article 102 TFEU; 

Exclusion to a degree less than is currently understood by ‘foreclosure’; 

Exclusionary conduct by a non-dominant firm; or 

Actions that might not be considered abuse that nonetheless have the effect of creating a 
monopoly. 

We do not, here, discuss (a) or (b) in detail.  If the concern is just with the evidential weight and due 
process requirements of Article 102 TFEU itself, then a new competition tool is unlikely to be the 
right solution.  Similarly, a lower threshold for intervention, below that of foreclosure (which as the 
Commission’s prioritisation guidance establishes, in any case, does not require complete exclusion 
from the market), but in a tool focused on similar conduct to Article 102 TFEU should not require a 
new instrument.  To do so would confuse firms exposed to both.  Furthermore, if the Commission 
believes  that  significant  competitive  harm  does,  in  fact,  result  from  exclusion  short  of  what  is 
generally understood by ‘foreclosure’, the obvious solution is to increase the role of effects-based 
analysis  in  evaluating  concerns  within  Article  102  TFEU  itself.    If,  as  a  pragmatic  matter,  the 
Commission believes that some markets (such as those dependent on digital platforms) require a 
pre-existing set of rules to ensure faster treatment of concerns than the existing Article 102 TFEU 
typically provides, then the ex-ante regulatory tool  proposed in  parallel  by DG  CNECT may  be a 
better approach than a new competition instrument.   

This leaves exclusionary conduct by non-dominant firms and conduct that might not be considered 
abusive.  Both do seem to us potentially to be gaps in the existing framework.  We discuss abuse 
by non-dominant firms with a particular focus on repeated leveraging and monopolisation below. 

However,  before  dealing  with  the  specific  concerns,  it  is  worth  setting  out  some  more  general 
thoughts on how and why anti-competitive exclusionary effects might arise that cannot be dealt with 
using Article 102 TFEU.  Dominance is a precondition for Article 102 TFEU because it is generally 
assumed that only a dominant firm would have (a) the ability and (b) the incentive to attempt most 
forms of abuse. Furthermore, the competitive process presumes any firm will  engage in conduct 
intended to increase its revenues partly at the expense of reducing rivals’ revenues. This includes 

3 

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
conduct that is generally procompetitive and stimulates investments, including bundling, exclusive 
dealing, loyalty inducing rebates or refusals to deal. In principle, according to economic theory and 
empirical evidence, these practices may lead to foreclosure to the detriment of consumers only when 
a firm has significant market power (i.e. enjoys a dominant position). 

The Commission’s guidelines on enforcement priorities make clear that the test of such exclusion is 
‘foreclosure’, which should not be understood to mean complete exclusion from the market but a 
significant competitive disadvantage (for example, by losing economies of scale and thus becoming 
less  competitive)  imposed  on  a  competitor  by  the  abusive  behaviour.  Many  commentators, 
especially economists, would add ‘to the detriment of consumers’ to that definition, not least because 
such a rider helps distinguish anti-competitive behaviour which is against consumers’ interests from 
pro-competitive behaviour. That has been the subject of much debate in recent years and we do not 
reprise that here. 

In  some  circumstances,  anti-competitive  effects  can  arise  when  a  non-dominant  firm  engages  in 
conduct at one point in time that may allow it to acquire a dominant position in the future - not through 
competition on the  merits,  but  through restricting  or distorting  the competitive process in a given 
market, or a set of related markets.  

Take, for example, predatory conduct by a non-dominant firm with very deep pockets.  Consider a 
market with very homogenous goods and easy customer switching. A firm with a 30% market share 
could cut its price below cost. If it had deep pockets to sustain the resulting loses for a long time, 
this may allow it to capture a large share of the market, perhaps even monopolise it. If rivals had 
exited the market and re-entry barriers were significant the firm may then be able to increase prices 
to  monopoly  levels  and  recoup  the  earlier  (sacrificed)  loses.  At  that  point,  the  firm  is  already 
dominant,  but  the  predatory  conduct  was  initiated  at  a  time  which  the  firm  was  not.  In  principle, 
predation by a non-dominant firm cannot constitute an infringement of Article 102 TFEU unless and 
until  it  is  clear  the  market  has  been  monopolised.  Even  ex-post,  it  may  be  extremely  difficult  to 
distinguish  aggressive  price  competition  by  efficient  firms  from  predatory  (below  cost)  pricing  by 
relatively less efficient ones. Making the wrong determination in this context can have severe chilling 
effects  on  price  competition.  Yet  arguably,  firms  that  can  extract  excess  rents  in  markets  they 
dominate can finance predatory practices in other, even completely unrelated markets, to acquire a 
dominant position. Having done so, they can raise prices. This may harm consumers overall, even 
considering the lower prices during the sacrifice phase.  

It is not clear how common this is: whether it is a serious concern in practice or merely an interesting 
theoretical possibility. Only if the exclusion is sufficient to drive competitors entirely from the market 
irreversibly  because  barriers  to  entry  are  high,  could  the  strategy  succeed.  This  is  theoretically 
possible,  but  the  Commission  may  want  to  consider  whether  the  prevalence  of  this  situation 
outweighs  any  economic  harm  that  would  result  from  abandoning  the  reassurance  that  the 
dominance  threshold  provides,  for  non-dominant  firms.    This  applies  particularly  to  evaluating 
concerns about repeated leveraging and monopolisation. 

The  same  concerns  potentially  arise  when  considering  tipping  markets,  but  in  such  markets  and 
(especially)  in  gatekeeper  scenarios,  the  concern  is  also  likely  to  be  with  point  (d),  above:  when 
actions by firms with control over market conditions could have profound effects on the effectiveness 
of competition in those markets, even if such actions were not aimed at anti-competitive exclusion 
of rivals.  We discuss that concern when we deal with tipping and gatekeepers, in sections 2.6 and 
2.7 below. 

4 

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
2.2 

Repeated leveraging strategies (Q8) 

Leveraging occurs when a firm exploits its market power in one market to develop and/or strengthen 
its presence in adjacent market(s).  

Leveraging could take the form, inter alia, of bundling, in which platforms can leverage their existing 
market power by requiring or encouraging the sale of their products in the adjacent market(s) with 
their existing services in their core market. Bundling can have anti-competitive or pro-competitive 
effects,  depending  on  the  extent  to  which  it  leads  to  foreclosure  and  efficiencies.  For  instance, 
platform providers often cite the benefits of more seamless user experience, directly benefiting users 
and  perhaps  allowing  third  parties  such  as  app  developers  to  use  the  platform’s  existing 
functionalities.  

Leveraging can be ‘offensive’ (to generate more profits) or ‘defensive’ (preventing entry in the core 
market from an adjacent, often niche, market). Offensive leveraging is usually considered less of a 
competition concern than defensive leveraging. The former tends to increase competitive pressure 
and  has  positive  effects  on  innovation  in  adjacent  markets.  The  latter  is  often  purely  based  on 
leveraging of market power and rarely has positive effects on innovation in adjacent markets. 

A specific form of bundling in platform markets is ‘envelopment’ when a platform with market power 
enters a new market pioneered by a rival platform and forecloses it. If the enveloping platform can 
leverage  its  customer  base  from  its  core  market  to  the  adjacent  market  (by  bundling  its  existing 
platform service with the new platform service), it can benefit from significant network effects when 
it enters the new market, making it more competitive in that market.  In some cases, this advantage 
might make it more competitive than the incumbent platform, in others, it might merely put the two 
on  a  similar  footing.   Therefore,  while  in  some  cases,  rivals  might  be  foreclosed,  in  other  cases 
envelopment  can  be  efficient  and  pro-competitive,  speeding  up  what  might  otherwise  be  a  slow 
process  of  user  adoption  (resolving  the  ‘chicken  and  egg’  problem  of  how  to  generate  network 
effects). 

Leveraging could also take the form of self-preferencing: a platform gives preferential treatment to 
its products or services in competition with those provided by others. Again, competitive effects are 
ambiguous. 

We understand that the Commission’s concerns relate to possible leveraging by firms not currently 
dominant (as well as a practical concern as to whether existing tools efficiently address repeated 
leveraging,  which  we  discuss  when  evaluating  the  tools,  in  Section  3,  below).   As  noted  in  the 
introduction  to  this  section,  as  a  matter  of  economics,  leveraging  strategies  can  be  successfully 
implemented  by  non-dominant  firms  with  a  certain  degree  of  market  power,  even  short  of 
dominance. Market power can result from, inter alia, control over an essential facility or interface, 
superior  access  to  information,  and/or  more  general  characteristics  of  the  core  market  such  as 
barriers to entry and customer lock-ins, etc. It can also emerge endogenously, through investments 
in R&D, advertising or direct and indirect network effects.  By leveraging its market power, a non-
dominant firm could impede competition just enough in an adjacent market to tip it in its favour. 

As Article 102 TFEU applies only to dominant firms, such action would not be covered by existing 
competition  law.    However,  this  does  not  necessarily  mean  that  there  is  a  significant  gap  in 
enforcement that requires a new tool because (a) it would need to be demonstrated how common 
such non-dominant leveraging strategies are in practice and (b) identifying and effectively dealing 
with the conduct by a non-dominant firm could be difficult, as we discuss later.  This assessment of 
conduct by non-dominant firms must also consider whether the conduct could be pro-competitive, 
just as (if not more so than) when assessing such conduct by dominant firms.  For this, it is essential 

5 

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
to assess effects.  A rules-based approach which is too rigid could lead to undue condemnation and 
restriction of efficient and even pro-competitive behaviour. 

2.3  Monopolisation (Q10) 

Monopolisation in this context refers to a market player rapidly increasing market share by placing 
its rivals at a disadvantage. 

We  set  out  a  taxonomy  of  possible  gaps  in  the  existing  framework  of Article  102  TFEU,  in  the 
introduction to this section at 2.1.  Here we consider two of those: monopolisation by a non-dominant 
supplier and conduct that might not be considered abusive that nonetheless leads to monopolisation.   

Similar considerations apply to monopolisation by a non-dominant supplier, as we discussed above 
for non-dominant leveraging.  Again, the Commission would need to consider both how common 
and  serious  the  problem  is,  as  well  as  the  practical  aspects  of  identifying  and  investigating  non-
dominant firms, as part of its evaluation. Furthermore, as noted above, it is essential to recognise 
that some conduct that leads to monopolisation may be efficient.   

The Commission might be concerned about conduct that appears non-abusive, taken by dominant 
or  non-dominant  firms,  in  a  nascent  market’s  early  days  that  may  lead  to  monopolisation  in  the 
future. In practice, the breadth of scope makes it hard to see how intervention could effectively target 
those actions which turn out to have anti-competitive consequences further down the line, while not 
deterring those that turn out to be pro-competitive.4 It is near-impossible to ‘pick winners’, particularly 
in  markets  based  on  technical  standards  in  which  network  effects  can  create  unstoppable 
momentum, based on tiny or even random initial differences in conditions. The Commission might 
have  been  concerned  about  the  market-leading  position  or  dominance  of  the  Symbian  O/S,  for 
example – wrongly, in retrospect.  Monopolisation after the fact is easy enough to recognise, but it 
is exceptionally difficult to  identify which small  innovator today might be the  dominant firm  of the 
future, let alone discriminate between conduct that would inevitably lead to monopoly power in the 
future and harm consumers to the point of offsetting the benefits brought about as the firm acquired 
its dominant position. 

More generally, the prospect of acquiring significant market power and being able to exploit it in the 
future is often the most powerful incentive to take investment risks, roll out new ideas, develop new 
technologies,  continue  to  improve  upon  existing  products,  and  in  effect,  engage  in  dynamic 
competition. Interfering with this process can have the opposite effect intended by antitrust rules. 

Consequently, although monopolisation can occur through actions or by players which might not be 
caught by the existing Article 102 TFEU provision, any action by the Commission should not seek 
to identify specific firms and actions in advance.  We strongly advise against relying on the NCT to 
target  specific  acts  of  nascent  or  attempted  monopolisation  by  non-dominant  firms.  There  is  no 
robust  economic  framework  that  can  discriminate  between  monopolisation  strategies  by  non-
dominant firms that would, eventually, end up harming consumers, and competition on the merits 

4  The issues relating to tipping markets are very similar, as we discuss below, but when the firm under investigation is not 
(yet) dominant it seems particularly impractical to pick it out from what might be many contenders for market leadership. 

6 

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
driven  by  the  prospect  of  future  supra-competitive  profits  to  cover  for  sunk,  risky  and  uncertain 
investments.5  

Rather,  in  applying  either  the  NCT  (most  likely  in  one  of  the  broader  ‘options’  considered  in  the 
consultation  –  see  below),  or  ex-ante  regulation  of  the  form  proposed  by  DG  CNECT,  the 
Commission should focus on setting rules of the game in a way that is likely to promote competition, 
rather  than  specifically  targeting  firms  and  conduct,  ex-post,  as  if  it  were  applying  an  instrument 
analogous  to Article  102 TFEU  (and  stopping  conduct  by  specific  firms  that  may  be  dominant  in 
future).   

2.4 

Oligopolistic markets / tacit collusion (Q12) 

The third area identified by the Commission raises very different issues from those at the core of 
existing competition law in the EU.  

Oligopoly markets are pervasive across many sectors of the economy. In such markets there are 
relatively small numbers of firms who are interdependent and can each, to some degree, influence 
the  market  price.  In  recognition  of  these  perceived  interdependencies,  profit-maximising  firms  in 
oligopoly  markets  will  rationally  consider  their  rivals’  behaviour  and  anticipated  reactions  when 
setting  prices  and  other  competitive  variables.  When  there  is  repeated  interaction  over  time, 
oligopolists may sustain supra-competitive prices.  

In some cases, oligopoly markets may exhibit an inefficient market outcome, which might be avoided 
were competition more intense. Although not necessarily covered by existing prohibitions, this might 
raise competition concerns. Market structures that could lead to inefficient high prices, for example, 
might take the form of: 

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

An oligopoly in which the suppliers do not compete vigorously with one another because 
customers face high switching costs or other barriers to switching timely or effectively; 

An oligopoly in which competition is weak because of tacit collusion: the suppliers, aware of 
the interdependence of their prices, forbear from vigorous price competition because their 
profitability  would  be  lower  in  the  more  competitive  market  they  expect  when  their  rivals 
react to price cuts. 

An  oligopoly  upstream  in  which  firms  non-cooperatively  select  a  common  agent 
downstream,  name  output  prices  and  choose  a  compensation  scheme.  In  effect,  the 
common  agent  aligns  the  incentives  of  upstream  oligopolies  and  may  lead  to  collusive 
outcomes, even in the absence of any explicit or tacit collusion. 

The above situations may present superficially similar outcomes: a few firms, little price-cutting and 
weak competition – but they are very different in economic terms and are likely to require different 
remedies.  The  first  ‘market’  could  almost  be  characterised  as  several  separate  markets:  each 
supplier behaves independently, perhaps because of customer inertia, technological lock-in or poor 
customer information. In the second and third scenario, oligopoly results in collusive outcomes even 
though participants’ actions need not infringe Article 101 TFEU. 

5 The Sherman Act in the United States provides for an offence of ‘attempted monopolisation”, which has been applied by 
the courts to require anticompetitive conduct undertaken with “a dangerous probability of achieving monopoly power.” 
Spectrum Sports, Inc. v. McQuillan, 506 U.S. 447, 456 (1993). However, it has also been interpreted to require “specific 
intent to monopolize.” Id. The Supreme Court has explained that this offence “directs itself not against conduct which is 
competitive, even severely so, but against conduct which unfairly tends to destroy competition itself.” Id. at 459. As a 
result, the intent element requires “a specific intent to destroy competition or build monopoly.” Times-Picayune Pub. Co. 
v. United States, 345 U.S. 594, 626 (1953).   

7 

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
These oligopolistic markets may be characterised as not working well, but for very different reasons, 
resulting  in  excessive  pricing. Arguably,  these  firms  can  be  considered  to  have  a  joint  dominant 
position and to be exploiting it to sustain excessive prices: the conduct potentially falling under Article 
102 TFEU.  However, the same difficulties in establishing when a single dominant firm is engaging 
in  excessive  pricing  are  present  and  indeed  exacerbated  when  considering  excessive  pricing  by 
joint dominant firms. It follows that Articles 101 and 102 TFEU are not well suited to address these 
competition problems. Indeed, an attempt to legitimise existing antitrust rules to deal with the above 
problems would stretch both Articles 101 and 102 TFEU beyond their intended limits. This would not 
only generate significant legal uncertainty (since even non-dominant firms engaging in non-collusive 
behaviour could be subject to antitrust enforcement),  but  it would also restrict (or worse, punish) 
oligopolists’  profit  maximising  conduct,  which,  in  effect,  is  what  drives  the  competitive  process. 
Again, the chilling effects can be severe.  

The question then is whether NCT could  help tackle  the problems resulting from competition not 
working well in tight oligopolies. In our view, provided that the NCT properly identifies and targets 
the cause of the problem (e.g. tacit collusion and its enabling factors such as barriers to entry) and 
not  the  consequence  (i.e.  excessive  prices),  one  can  improve  upon  outcomes  in  oligopolistic 
markets with appropriate remedies that would not harm competition in unintended ways.      

For  example,  in  markets  prone  to  tacit  collusion  due  to  exogenous  facilitating  practices  (e.g.  a 
regulatory  obligation  that  generates  excess  market  transparency),  a  targeted  remedy  seeking  to 
eliminate  the  relevant  facilitating  practice  may  improve  competitive  outcomes  to  the  benefit  of 
consumers. 

2.5 

AI and tacit collusion (Q14) 

Algorithms and AI present a double-edged sword to competitive markets. On the one hand, they can 
enhance competition by facilitating rapid response to changing competitive conditions and customer 
demand. Enhanced price discovery and dissemination are likely to make markets more efficient and 
competitive.  On  the  other  hand,  increased  prevalence  of  algorithms  and AI  may  facilitate  (tacit) 
collusion and even make explicit cartels more stable.  

Coordinated effects/tacit collusion by AI pricing algorithms have received much attention in recent 
academic literature and policy debates, although we are not aware of any actual studies or cases to 
date that have found such effects in the real world, as opposed to experimental settings. The concept 
is  not  inherently  different  from  (tacit)  collusion  more  generally.  It  is  sometimes  expressed  as 
automation of price setting that potentially means that behaviour that could be considered a breach 
of Article 101 TFEU if carried out by humans is not necessarily such a breach. The concerns raised 
over potential collusion using pricing algorithms can be grouped into three scenarios:  

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

the use of automated algorithms to implement explicit collusive pricing agreements between 
competitors.  

“hub-and-spoke” scenarios where competitors (spokes) use a common third-party pricing 
algorithm (hub), which may lead to coordinated pricing; and  

unilateral use of self-learning autonomous pricing algorithms by competitors that may lead 
to supra-competitive prices through ‘conscious’ parallelism or tacit collusion.  

Contrary to the economic approach, which considers collusion a market outcome, the legal approach 
focuses on the means used by competitors to achieve such a collusive outcome. Competition laws 
generally do not prohibit collusive outcomes as such, but prohibit anti-competitive agreements or 
concerted practices, or more generally an exchange of information that could facilitate collusion by 

8 

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
enabling competitors to identify a “common policy”; to monitor the adherence to this common policy, 
and to enforce the common policy by punishing any deviations.  

For this reason, it is important to make a distinction between the three scenarios.  

 

 

 

In (a), algorithms merely amplify conduct which is already caught under the current legal 
framework  and  therefore Article  101  TFEU  is  in  principle  capable  of  dealing  with  these 
issues.  The  most  obvious  and  simple  role  of  algorithms  as  facilitators  of  collusion  is  in 
monitoring competitors’ actions to enforce a collusive agreement. This role may include the 
collection of information concerning competitors’ business decisions, data screening to look 
for  any  potential  deviations  and  eventually  the  programming  of  immediate  retaliation. 
Algorithms may also reduce the cost  of initiating the  collusion  in the first place. Although 
signalling may be observed virtually in any market, it usually does not come without a cost. 
Whenever a firm increases the price to indicate an intention to collude, if most competitors 
do not receive the signal or intentionally decide not to react, the signalling firm loses sales 
and profits. This risk might encourage firms to wait for other competitors to signal, eventually 
leading to delay or even failure to coordinate. Algorithms might reduce or even eliminate the 
cost of signalling, by enabling companies to automatically set very fast iterative actions that 
cannot be exploited by consumers, but which can still be read by rivals possessing good 
analytical algorithms. 

In  (b),  algorithms  also  amplify  conduct  which  is  already  caught  under  the  current  legal 
framework  and  therefore Article  101  TFEU  is  in  principle  capable  of  dealing  with  these 
issues. In particular, the widespread knowledge and use of common pricing algorithms by 
competitors  may  have  a  similar  effect  to  information  exchange  in  reducing  strategic 
uncertainty.  Furthermore,  if  competitors  decide  to  delegate  their  pricing  decisions  to  a 
common intermediary which provides algorithmic pricing services, this may also result in a 
hub-and-spoke-like  framework  emerging.  The  main  issue  in  the  assessment  of  such 
conduct  is  the  determination  of  the  level  of  knowledge  of  each  company  about  the 
anticompetitive coordination taking place through algorithmic setting. 

In  (c),  algorithms  create  new  risks  related  to  behaviours  not  covered  by  prohibitions  on 
explicit  collusion.  The  most  complex  and  subtle  way  in  which  algorithms  can  achieve 
collusive outcomes is through the use of machine learning and deep learning technologies, 
which  may  potentially  enable  a  monopoly  outcome  even  without  competitors  explicitly 
programming algorithms to do so. In other words, there is the risk that some algorithms with 
powerful predictive capacity, by constantly learning and readapting to the actions of other 
market players (who may be human beings or artificial agents themselves), will be able to 
collude without the need for any human intervention. 

When  considering  the  likelihood  of  this  last  concern  arising  and  ‘innocuous’  profit-maximising 
algorithms learning to collude, the nature of price setting in the market is likely to be important. In 
markets with very frequent price-setting, the possibilities for experimenting with pricing strategies 
that collectively can result in collusively high, even monopoly pricing, is greater. Thus, the concern 
is as much with high-frequency pricing as with the AIs/algorithms as such.6 

6   Possibly  very  high  frequency.  One  experimental  study,  for  example,  found  algorithmic  collusion  to  emerge  after  an 
average of 165,000 price-setting periods. This is equivalent to 13,750 years if firms change prices monthly or about 115 
days if firms change prices every minute. Emilio Calvano et al, ‘Algorithmic Pricing and Collusion: What Implications for 
Competition 
at 
Paper 
<papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3209781> accessed 7 September 2020. 

(University 

available 

Working 

Bologna 

Policy?’ 

2018) 

of 

9 

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Theoretical and experimental models of tacit collusion confirm that frequent interaction is necessary 
for successful collusion without communication to raise prices. Economists model tacit collusion as 
being enforced by the threat of price wars triggered by prices below the collusive level, so the ability 
to monitor and react quickly to rivals’ prices is essential. Frequent interaction enables firms seeking 
to reach tacitly collusive outcomes to punish such ‘defection’ with price cuts and also to experiment 
by  raising  prices,  without  incurring  large  risks  from  doing  so.  Conversely,  if  rivals  do  not  reduce 
prices, over time, even though they reconsider prices frequently, that builds trust among the colluding 
firms in one another’s understanding of the ‘collusion game’ and commitment to it. Higher frequency 
price-setting makes all of this behaviour more likely, as (perhaps) does price setting across a large 
number of different products and markets, as it enables experimentation with pricing patterns on a 
small,  low-risk scale. No signalling would need to  be  involved  in  any such outcome, so it seems 
unlikely to be caught by the existing provisions. 

In  summary:  if  an  algorithm  is  designed  to  collude,  as  under  (a)  and  (b)  above,  then  that  is  not 
inherently different from companies giving sales staff instructions not to undercut certain rivals. That 
could  be  seen  as  a  specific  commitment  to  collusion,  as  a  deliberate  act  by  the  company  to 
(eventually) collude. More problematic is the case (c) when the algorithm has no instructions except 
to maximise profit and ‘discovers’ tacit collusion by itself through trial and error. This will only occur 
in  markets  with  very  frequent  price  setting.    Some  commentators  have  suggested  that  there  are 
particular  ‘patterns’ of behaviour  that could be outlawed  to  make such  outcomes less  likely – for 
example, banning the use of rivals’ past pricing data in setting today’s prices. Thus, one of the main 
risks of algorithms is that they expand the grey area between unlawful explicit collusion and lawful 
tacit  collusion,  where  firms  could  take  steps  to  make  tacit  collusion  more  likely  but  without 
necessarily  engaging  in  behaviour  that  is  itself  collusive  or  even  (although  this  would  be  more 
borderline) concerted practices.  Such behaviour may be a gap in the existing legislation (although 
as no such cases have been brought, to our knowledge, the question remains untested).  

2.6 

Tipping markets (Q16) 

A ‘tipping market’ is one in which, under some circumstances (such as the emergence of a leading 
firm), normal (non-abusive) market processes can lead to monopolisation. Abusive behaviour can 
also lead to such monopolisation, but this may be covered by existing competition law (and we briefly 
discussed the issues involved in such behaviour by non-dominant suppliers, above).  

There are several reasons for markets to ‘tip’ but most relate to some kind of feedback loops. If an 
increasing number of other users makes a product more attractive to an individual user, then there 
is potential for a runaway effect that leads to monopolisation or near-monopolisation.7 Other factors 
are  also  relevant  for  the  likelihood  of  market  tipping  such  as  economies  of  scale  and  scope; 
integration of products, services and hardware; behavioural limitations on the part of consumers; 
difficulty in raising capital; and the importance of brands. 

The  issue  of  “tipping”  is  not  new,  and  it  is  not  limited  to  digital  platforms.  Competition  between 
standards often results in the market tipping towards a preferred standard (e.g. VHS, DVD, USB-C). 
It also occurs in financial infrastructure markets and various other markets with significant network 
effects. However, it is often argued that modern platforms are different, and that competition for the 
market cannot be counted on, by itself, to solve the problems associated with market tipping. Many 
of the dominant technology companies of the past seemed unassailable but then faced unexpected 

7   Although a market can ‘tip’ to a structure less extreme than monopoly and still be stable. Some have argued that this is 
the  case  for  smartphone  operating  systems  (see  Timothy  Bresnahan,  Joe  Orsini,  and  Pai-Ling  Yin,  ‘Demand 
Heterogeneity, Inframarginal Multihoming, and Platform Market Stability: Mobile Apps’, Stanford University (15 September 
2015)  available  at  <http://idei.fr/sites/default/files/IDEI/documents/conf/Internet_2016/Articles/yin.pdf>  accessed  7 
September 2020.) 

10 

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
competition  due  to  technological  changes  that  created  new  markets  and  new  companies. Today, 
network effects and returns to scale of data appear to be even more entrenched and some markets 
may be more stable. Moreover, if the next technological revolution arises from artificial intelligence 
and machine learning, then the companies most able to take advantage of it may well be the existing 
large companies because of the importance of data for the successful use of these tools. New entry 
may still be possible in some markets, but this merely raises additional concerns about mergers that 
lead to such entrants being taken over by existing platform providers. 

Timing is crucial if considering intervention in a market that could tip. Because the processes during 
the ‘tipping’ phase itself are in some sense ‘natural’, once the market is in the course of tipping, it 
may be too late to intervene. So, if it is an action by a supplier that creates the preconditions for 
tipping, then that action will occur before that market becomes monopolised, possibly even before it 
becomes obvious that it is heading that way. Consequently, regulatory intervention to prevent tipping 
may need to occur long before a supplier is dominant. Again, this raises questions of practicality: 
can actions that might lead to undue tipping be identified reliably, in a manner that does not catch 
so many actions as effectively to deter normal and innovative behaviour? 

However, there  is  a  more  fundamental question to address: should a competition authority try to 
prevent ‘tipping’ at all? In most cases, tipping markets are driven by efficiencies. For example, it is 
simply more efficient to have common standards in many IT and other services and this will often 
be the outcome of free customer choice. Artificial intervention simply to prevent the growth of market 
shares could therefore result in inefficient outcomes (which may be better or worse for consumers 
than monopoly, depending on the effects of the residual competition in the inefficient oligopolistic 
market). In some cases, it might be possible to identify better remedies, such as those promoting 
interoperability,  which  may  alter  the  economics  of  the  market  more  fundamentally,  so  that  it  can 
maintain multiple providers without inefficiency. 

2.7 

Gatekeepers (Q18) 

Gatekeepers in the traditional economy are owners of infrastructure assets to which other firms need 
access  to  compete.  Today,  gatekeepers  are  the  owners  of  information  systems  and  technology 
platforms that enable access to customers and data in many connected markets.  

Gatekeepers achieve  their  status and  position  of strength due to  their attractiveness to users on 
both sides of their platforms, as well as the existence of network effects, which limits the incentives 
of users to switch to rival platforms.  

The primary competition concern concerning gatekeepers is that they may be able to leverage their 
market power and exclude or foreclose rivals in neighbouring markets, for example through refusal 
to supply or discrimination, both of which are abuses for which dominance is a pre-condition. As the 
Commission’s  description  of  potential  concerns  states,  what  sets  gatekeepers  apart  from  other 
platforms  (and  simply  dominant  firms)  is  their  ability  to  control  not  just  one  market  but  entire 
ecosystems of unrelated markets (e.g. an operating system and a streaming service): “[l]arge online 
platforms  are  able  to  control  increasingly  important  platform  ecosystems  in  the  digital  economy. 
Typically, they feature an ability to connect many businesses with many consumers through their 
services  that,  in  turn,  allows  them  to  leverage  their  advantages,  such  as  their  access  to  large 
amounts  of  data,  from  one  area  of  their  activity  to  improve  or  develop  new  services  in  adjacent 
markets. These large online platforms also increasingly bundle a broad range of platforms and other 
digital services into a seamless, data-driven offer.” Concerns about the gatekeeper role have also 
been  expressed  concerning  self-preferencing,  a  form  of  anticompetitive  leveraging  (e.g.  Google 
Shopping). 

11 

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Commission’s consultation document refers not only to the existence of gatekeepers but also 
to  their  emergence  as  an  issue  to  be  considered.  The  arguments  around  the  emergence  of 
gatekeepers are closely related to those concerning tipping markets discussed in the previous sub-
section. Gatekeepers can emerge and achieve their gatekeeper status due to efficiencies, offering 
attractive products to  users on both sides of the  platform.  Which of several rivals may ultimately 
achieve gatekeeper status cannot usually be easily predicted. The concerns here are very similar to 
those discussed above in relation to intervening in markets before they tip.  

3 

Suitability of existing rules and the NCT policy options to address concerns  

This  section  evaluates  the  respective  suitability  of  existing  antitrust  rules  and  the  options  the 
Commission has put forward for a new competition tool, to address each of the issues identified in 
Section 2 above. In summary, those options are as follows: 

  Options 1 and 2 represent new ‘dominance-based tools’, focusing on unilateral conduct of 
a specific dominant undertaking (dominance-based), regardless of the industry in which it 
operates for Option 1; limited to specific industries (notably the digital sector) for Option 2. 

  Options 3 and 4 allow the Commission to intervene when a structural problem that cannot 
be  addressed  through  the  enforcement  of  EU  competition  rules  prevents  a  market  from 
functioning  properly,  potentially  imposing  remedies  on  all  market  participants  whether 
dominant or not.  This tool would apply regardless of the industry for Option 3, or limited to 
specific industries (notably the digital sector) for Option 4. 

We treat together those issues which seem to us to be closely linked together: 

 

repeated  leveraging  and  monopolisation  strategies,  as  our  focus  in  both  has  been  on 
abusive  action  by  a  non-dominant  firm  (concerns  about  monopolisation  through  tipping 
being dealt with below); 

  oligopoly  and  tacit  collusion  in  general  and  the  specific  concerns  about  algorithmic  tacit 

collusion; and 

 

tipping and gatekeeper scenarios, in that both involve assessment by the Commission of 
conduct in a nascent market, at a time when identifying specific firms or specific conduct 
as likely to lead to competition problems, will be difficult. 

3.1 

Repeated leveraging strategies and monopolisation (Q9 / Q11) 

Existing Antitrust Rules 

Both anti-competitive leveraging itself and foreclosure leading to monopolisation more generally are 
largely within the scope of existing competition law. For a dominant firm, the conduct will often be 
within the scope of Article 102 TFEU. The Commission also considers whether the scope for anti-
competitive  leveraging  from  mergers  and  acquisitions  is  enhanced  under  horizontal,  vertical  or 
conglomerate theories of harm and could block or remedy a merger likely to give rise to a SIEC on 
those grounds. 

However, existing competition law may occasionally not be able to deal with the underlying causes 
of  the  market  power  or  the  links  between  the  monopolised  and  target  markets  that  make 
monopolisation, whether through anti-competitive leveraging or otherwise, possible. Remedies in an 
Article 102 TFEU case (or merger control), being necessarily limited to the dominant firm itself, might 
not  be  ideal  to  resolve  these  underlying  issues,  which  require  a  market-wide,  quasi-regulatory 
solution.   

12 

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Additionally,  due  to  limited  administrative  resources,  the  enforcement  of  existing  competition  law 
may struggle to manage situations where a single dominant firm pursues multiple distinct leveraging 
or monopolisation strategies. This often results in the opening of multiple antitrust investigations in 
parallel  (e.g.  Qualcomm  (Predation,  Exclusivity),  Google  (Shopping,  Adsense,  Android),  Apple 
(Music Streaming, Audiobooks) which may be in some way related in terms of the strategy pursued 
by the dominant firm, but where differences in the alleged anticompetitive objective pursued require 
separate investigations to be opened, which may create a strain on resources and limits investigative 
efficiency. 

Furthermore,  similar  conduct  at  different  times  could  give  rise  to  repeated  investigations.  We 
understand that the Commission may have concerns about repeated leveraging, against which an 
instrument  such  as Article  102  TFEU,  focused  on  specific  conduct,  might  not  be  effective.    The 
Commission might find and penalise, a dominant firm abusing its strong platform to leverage into 
one  market,  for  example,  without  this  necessarily  preventing  subsequent  leveraging  into  other 
markets (and much of the concern about large digital platforms is the ubiquity of their relevance to 
many different markets).  This could point in favour of the use of a new tool that has a broader focus.   

However,  it  is  worth  noting  again  that  leveraging  can  have  pro-competitive  or  anti-competitive 
effects,  so  a  case-based  approach  often  will  be  more  appropriate,  especially  compared  to  some 
blanket prohibition on certain types of conduct by a platform owner.  If recent leveraging precedents 
were taken as a broad prohibition on product integration, there would be an overdeterrence of pro-
competitive leveraging strategies.  

Furthermore, Article 102 TFEU allows for financial penalties, which are intended to have a deterrent 
effect,  while  the  new  tool  would  be  more  focused  on  remedial  action.  A  tough  stance  in  the 
application  of  Article  102  TFEU  could  therefore  provide  better  reassurance  against  future  anti-
competitive leveraging by a dominant firm than would broad-based remedies with wider effects than 
the specific markets affected by leveraging.  If existing deterrence is seen as ineffective, this might 
simply reflect the difficulty of clearly distinguishing, in broad terms, where leveraging is likely to be 
anticompetitive, and where it is likely to be pro-competitive. In light of these ambiguous effects, it 
may be harmful to platform innovation to address leveraging concerns using a broad-brush approach 
under the NCT. 

Dominance-based NCT (Options 1 and 2) 

Options 1 and 2 would enable the Commission to intervene generally against dominant firms, with 
a potentially broader scope for intervention than existing enforcement under Article 102 TFEU, which 
focuses on abusive strategies which pursue a single objective. Options 1 and 2 may theoretically 
allow the Commission to address multiple distinct leveraging strategies by a single dominant firm in 
one procedure.  

Generally, the assessment of leveraging as conduct that can potentially breach Article 102 TFEU 
requires consideration of effects. It is however far from clear how multiple strategies, which may be 
in  a  form  similar  but  whose  effects  may  be  different,  can  be  evaluated.  Each  of  the  types  of 
leveraging  considered  can  have  both  pro-competitive  and  anti-competitive  effects.  It  would,  self-
evidently, be absurd to prohibit the conduct of ‘bundling’ in itself, as almost every product or service 
is in some sense a bundle of component products and services. This applies to dominant firms as 
much as to non-dominant ones.  

Accordingly, if the focus of an investigation of a leveraging concern is a dominant firm engaged in 
leveraging,  it  is  hard  to  see  how  a  tool  with  a  lower  threshold  for  intervention  could  be  more 
appropriate  than  the  existing  Article  102  TFEU.  Leveraging  and  bundling  concerns  are  core 
concerns for Article 102 TFEU, so if the threshold for intervention against them needs to be lower, 

13 

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
that is an argument which goes to the appropriate interpretation of Article 102 TFEU itself and does 
not justify introducing a parallel instrument.  

Similarly, it is hard to see that a new tool, with a lower threshold for intervention, would be the right 
approach  to  dealing  with  monopolisation  through  other  means  by  dominant  firms  that  are  not 
currently prohibited by Article 102 TFEU. Monopolisation itself is a rather extreme outcome of abuse 
of dominance, so if there are any such situations not currently prohibited, this is presumably because 
they  involve  conduct  that  is  not  normally  considered  abusive,  but  which  nonetheless  leads  to 
foreclosure of rivals and thus monopolisation. If Article 102 TFEU does not capture such conduct, 
the obvious solution is to place more emphasis on effects within the assessment of Article 102 TFEU 
cases, rather than either (a) to add additional specific forms of conduct to a form-based prohibition 
or (b) introduce a new instrument. 

Market-structure based NCT (Options 3 and 4) 

As  described  above,  existing  competition  law  may  occasionally  not  be  able  to  deal  with  the 
underlying causes of the market power that make monopolisation, whether through anti-competitive 
leveraging or otherwise, possible. Market-wide solutions may in some cases be more effective, for 
example: 

(a) 

(b) 

Barriers  to  entry  and  barriers  to  switching  may  arise  from  technical  incompatibility.  A 
dominant firm perhaps has the incentive to maintain its standards (and could be required to 
open its system as part of Article 102 TFEU remedies) but a market-wide regulatory solution 
might be more effective. 

Network effects can also create barriers to entry and switching, as when users would be 
reluctant to use a service for which their existing social network contacts are not existing 
users. Compatibility between networks and data portability can provide a solution but, again, 
while these are often primarily the responsibility of a dominant firm, a market-wide solution 
may be better. 

In both cases, a market-wide remedy, not limited to any dominant firms as would be the case under 
Article 102 TFEU, can be more complete in its effects and also allow market-wide standards other 
than those of any existing dominant firm, forced to open its platform. It could also be more resilient 
to  technological  or  market  changes:  dealing  with  the  potential  emergence  of  new  leading  firms 
without needing to subject them to a new investigation. 

This should not be seen as an alternative way of investigating conduct by a specific firm.  Rather, 
such market-wide remedies are more akin to ex-ante regulation, in that they should aim to promote 
competition by setting the rules of the game, rather than correcting the behaviour of individual firms 
seen as abusive.  Their value is likely to arise more from forward-looking prevention of future conduct 
than correcting specific wrongs.   As such, although  the market-wide  options 3  and 4 for the new 
competition tool may be able to produce such benefits, so might the ex-ante tool (focused on digital 
markets) proposed by DG Connect.  

In short, in general, the existing framework of competition law is likely to be adequate to deal with 
traditional concerns about leveraging and monopolisation conduct by specified firms. However, there 
will  be  occasions  when  a  market-wide  remedy  can  establish  a  more  pro-competitive  market 
environment for the future. The new tool could be useful in such cases. However, we note that other 
mechanisms,  such  as  the  voluntary  agreement  of  standards  between  non-dominant  market 
participants following a finding of abuse of dominance against a platform owner, might also achieve 
such ends, as might the proposed ex-ante tool for digital markets. 

14 

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.2 

Oligopoly and tacit collusion (including AI/algorithmic collusion) (Q13 / Q15) 

Existing Antitrust Rules 

Whether existing antitrust rules are sufficient to deal with the Commission’s concerns concerning 
oligopoly and tacit collusion depends on how broad those concerns are. Some forms of collusion 
that fall short of explicit communication can nonetheless in principle be caught by Article 101 TFEU 
(to the extent there are concerted practices which lead to parallel conduct). Indeed, this may apply 
even to novel forms of collusion such as through algorithmic/AI pricing, if the competition authorities 
can identify features of the algorithm’s design that seem intended to facilitate collusion. Such pricing 
does  not  inherently  raise  any  new  issues  for  competition  authorities  in  identifying  collusive 
behaviour. If a supplier has designed a pricing algorithm’s workings or goals in a way that seems 
likely  to  give  rise  to  collusive  outcomes,  then  arguably  that  decision  could  be  assessed  as  a 
concerted practice, even if the pricing ‘decisions’ themselves are not the conscious actions of the 
firm as a whole. 

However, if the Commission believes it is necessary to take action against pure tacit collusion, or 
the conditions that cause it, in any market in which the effect is super-normal pricing, then Article 
101 TFEU  does  not  enable  intervention  where  there  is  no  agreement  or  concerted  practice.  For 
example, in some industries prices may ‘naturally’ be transparent, as in various online markets in 
which competitors can easily learn about their competitors’ pricing in real-time. In other industries, 
prices  might  be  much  harder  to  observe  accurately  or  on  time.  It  may  be  possible  to  assess  a 
scheme for publishing prices in the second kind of industry as a possible concerted practice under 
Article  101  TFEU,  as  it  might  be  intended  to  facilitate  collusion.  However,  it  might  not  suit  the 
Commission’s purposes only to be able to take action in such a market but not in the former market 
in which prices are naturally transparent. To do so would require a tool focused on tacitly collusive 
outcomes, as such, not specific conduct. 

Dominance-based tool 

By definition, oligopoly necessarily involves more than one firm (unlike monopoly) and an outcome 
which  is  significantly  affected  by  the  behaviour  of  individual  firms  within  the  market  (unlike  a 
reasonably competitive market). Consequently, whether the concern is with tacit collusion or other 
oligopolistic interaction, a dominance-based tool would appear to be wholly unsuitable. First, there 
is no guarantee that any of the firms in the market will be dominant. Second, even if there were, an 
investigation and any remedies focused  on  only a  dominant  participant would  not be effective or 
particularly  meaningful.  Even  if  the  dominant  participant’s  behaviour  changed,  that  would  not 
necessarily  change  the  behaviour  of  other  participants  or  remove  the  underlying  conditions  that 
made such behaviour possible. 

This applies equally to AI/algorithmic collusion. Such collusion is generally assumed to arise from 
the interaction between algorithms setting the prices of competing products, so a focus only on a 
dominant firm would not be sensible. 

Market Structure-based tool 

It  is  in  the  area  of  oligopoly  that  a  new  market-wide  tool  potentially  adds  the  most  to  the 
Commission’s existing instruments. There is no obvious way to interpret Article 102 TFEU to cover 
situations in which an oligopoly acts in a manner that is against the interests of consumers, in the 
form of a ‘collective dominance excessive pricing’ case. An alternative, building on Article 101 TFEU, 
would be a tool which could deal with pure tacit collusion, without any evidence of an agreement or 
concerted practice.   

15 

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
However, we understand that the Commission’s concern may also be broader, covering markets in 
which ‘competition does not work well’, to use a phrase that has sometimes been used to describe 
the focus of the UK’s existing market investigation regime. In such markets, the outcomes reflecting 
a  lack  of  effective  competition  might  arise  from  behaviour  that  is  a  rational  response  to  market 
conditions. In those situations, no prohibited conduct could be identified. So, a market-based tool 
that is intended to deal with ‘features of the market that could have an adverse effect on competition’ 
(to use wording from the UK legislation) may be more effective than any of the Commission’s existing 
tools.    That  would  cover  features  that  could  give  rise  to  tacit  collusion.    However,  it  could  also 
encompass  a  wide  range  of  conditions,  many  of  which  are  more  closely  related  to  consumer 
protection policy than to competition policy, which we do not believe should be within the scope of 
the NCT as we discuss in Section 4.1. 

This type of broad-based instrument could cover a wide range of possible market conditions, as the 
CMA’s track record in the UK demonstrates. While an individual discussion of each possible scenario 
is beyond the scope of this paper, we  set out below a number of general points that should be taken 
into  account  in  order  to  ensure  that  any  such  tool  is    effective  in  addressing  markets  with  weak 
competition while leaving be those markets in which competition works reasonably well: 

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

Any assessment of excessive pricing and profits needs to be conducted with a significant 
margin allowing for prices to be ‘high’ and profits too, on most occasions, without attracting 
regulatory  intervention.  The  existing  prohibition  on  excessive  pricing  has  rightly  been 
applied,  with  caution,  only  to  cases  in  which  prices  bear  ‘no  reasonable  relation’  to 
competitive benchmarks and of course it can only be applied to dominant firms. A tool with 
a  lower  threshold  for  intervention,  that  could  in  principle  impose  price  controls  or  other 
remedies in any markets, wherever the Commission detected prices higher than it thought 
right  would  substitute  the  Commission’s  opinion  for  that  of  the  market,  and  lead  to  an 
excessive degree of state intervention, chilling innovation, investment and risk-taking. 

An adverse finding (of problems within an oligopolistic market) should be assessed against 
a well-defined counterfactual. If, for example, the Commission finds that market participants 
could compete harder against one another, it needs to be able to describe clearly what that 
would look like and demonstrate with evidence what the effects would be. For example, it 
would not make sense in a market in which fixed costs of operation were high, to assert that 
prices would be lower and consumers better off, were there simply more competitors if that 
is not compatible with fixed cost recovery.  The counterfactual should be restricted to the set 
of feasible market conditions and not include purely fanciful alternative circumstances.  One 
way to do that is to restrict the counterfactual to conditions that could be brought about by 
realistic remedies, as we now discuss. 

Any such investigation must involve consideration of feasible remedies, from the start (and 
before the start). If, for example, the Commission finds that a market is characterised by 
tacit collusion, it should be prepared to impose remedies that somehow change the ability 
of  incentives  of  market  participants  to  collude  (for  example  by  reducing  barriers  to  entry, 
prohibiting certain price transparency practices and so on). Investigating to find and apply 
sanctions  to  participants  is  not  appropriate,  for  a  market-wide  instrument  (and  it  is  not 
participants’ behaviour that is the primary focus). We would suggest that if the Commission 
does  not  believe  it  can  remedy  the  underlying  causes  of  some  weakness  in  competition 
(tacit  collusion  or  otherwise)  it  should  be  very  reluctant  to  intervene,  as  the  most  likely 
outcome is price control – which has great potential for economic harm. 

This applies equally to AI/algorithmic collusion, though it is important to make a distinction between 
instances  where  algorithms  amplify  conduct  which  is  already  covered  under  the  current  legal 

16 

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
framework (where no change would be required) and algorithms which increase the risk of tacitly 
collusive outcomes,  while  not  infringing current rules, as we discussed in  Section 2.   As we  also 
noted there, the concerns about the second case are still very speculative. We are not aware of any 
specific  concerns  that  a  competition  authority  has  expressed  about  algorithmic  pricing  and  been 
unable to take action under current laws, so it cannot be regarded as proven that new instruments 
are required to deal with this hypothetical concern.  

3.3 

Tipping markets and Gatekeeper Scenarios (Q17 / Q19) 

Existing Antitrust Rules 

“Gatekeeper” scenarios and “tipping” markets are concepts which are familiar in the enforcement of 
Article 102 TFEU. However, these concerns may also relate to non-dominant firms which fall outside 
the  scope  of Article  102  TFEU,  as  discussed  above.    In  general,  the  difficulties  in  dealing  with 
gatekeeper scenarios and tipping markets relate to identifying the right moment  and right way to 
intervene.  When the concern stems from action by an existing dominant firm, such as a dominant 
platform  owner  restricting  access  or  otherwise  using  unfair  advantages  to  stifle  competitors  in  a 
nascent  market,  existing  competition  tools  are  likely  to  be  adequate  to  the  task  in  principle.8  
However, such nascent markets often  need  quicker intervention if any abuse is to be addressed 
swiftly  enough  to  preserve  competition,  before  the  market  tips  (and,  for  example,  adopts 
compatibility with the dominant platform, as a de facto standard).  There may therefore be a gap that 
a new tool could fill, even in dealing with cases where Article 102 TFEU could apply. 

However, the more likely use of the new tool, as discussed above, is to deal with situations where 
markets tip not as the result of anti-competitive conduct by a dominant firm but as a result of conduct 
(or the existence of market features) that do not constitute abusive behaviour, by a dominant firm.  
Similarly, there may be situations of anti-competitive behaviour (or, again, innocuous behaviour that 
nonetheless leads to inefficient monopolisation) by a firm that is not dominant (or not dominant yet).   
Existing tools are clearly not designed or suitable to deal with such situations; so, a broader pro-
competitive means of intervention would be needed. 

Dominance-based tool 

A dominance-based tool could potentially allow the Commission to intervene to prevent a dominant 
firm taking action to induce nascent markets to ‘tip’ in its favour, and/or to prevent a dominant firm 
from achieving gatekeeper status. The tool could therefore be used in particular to address concerns 
that dominant platforms could engage in conduct that might not in itself be considered abusive under 
Article 102 TFEU but could nonetheless cause markets to ‘tip’ to extend that firm’s dominance to 
new markets. 

A  dominance-based  tool  would  only  be  appropriate  if  the  Commission  believed  (a)  there  are 
potentially many such cases in  which such  behaviour by dominant firms  would  not  be caught by 
existing competition law (or, due to limited administrative resources, competition enforcement) and 
(b) there are few such cases which would require a broader-based tool that can also be applied to 
non-dominant firms. 

8   Some commentators argue that identifying dominance in platform markets is often difficult.  For example, assessing the 
ability  to  price  independently  of  competitive constraints  can  be more  complex in  two-sided  markets than  in  traditional 
markets.  However, this does not seem to us to be a valid reason to drop the dominance requirement, as it reflects ways 
in which platforms genuinely might differ from such traditional markets and the reason it is hard to establish dominance is 
often  that  there  are  additional  reasons  why  dominance  may  not  be  present.    It  is  important  properly  to  assess  those 
additional reasons, not simply ignore them.  

17 

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The combination of the two propositions seems to us quite reasonable. In particular, there may be 
platforms which  are clearly dominant  in certain markets and can extend  that dominance to other 
markets that could ‘tip’, because of network effects or other feedback loops (as discussed above). 

The use of an investigative tool in such situations, however, implies that the Commission would be 
considering them on a case-by-case basis. It may be that identifying which markets could tip and 
how (and when and to whom) is too difficult for this to be a reliable exercise. If so, some broader-
brush prohibitions that might be  better-applied  ex-ante by a regulatory instrument could be more 
effective.  

Again, we note that the Commission should not assume that a market’s tipping is necessarily a bad 
outcome, even if it reinforces the dominance of an existing platform provider. This could be the most 
efficient outcome of competition and it could be harmful to impose artificial prohibitions seeking to 
sustain two or more providers, or preventing genuine synergies emerging from the platform owner 
extending its activities to other markets.  

It is helpful to distinguish between (i) intervention to prevent the emergence of gatekeeper status; 
and (ii) intervention in cases where a firm already has gatekeeper status.  

The arguments for intervening to prevent the emergence of gatekeeper status are closely related to 
those  just  discussed  in  connection  with  tipping. The  emergence  of  a  firm  with  gatekeeper  status 
could also be an efficient outcome of the competitive process.  Attempting to predict whether and 
how to intervene to prevent the emergence of a gatekeeper could deter innovation or be prone to 
regulatory errors. 

If  a  firm  is  already  a  gatekeeper,  competition  concerns  relate  to  anticompetitive  foreclosure  and 
discrimination  and  are  closely  linked  to  those  discussed  above  in  relation  to  leveraging.  For  the 
reasons  above,  relaxing  the  threshold  for  intervention  in  Article  102  TFEU  cases  seems  more 
appropriately a matter for the Courts’ interpretation of Article 102 TFEU or, indeed, reform of Article 
102 TFEU itself rather than justifying the introduction of a new competition tool expressly for this 
purpose. 

Market Structure-based tool 

As discussed above, we think it quite possible that action against dominant platform owners could 
help prevent markets from tipping unduly or to reinforce an existing dominant position, or to prevent 
a firm from becoming a gatekeeper. We also noted that an ex-ante regulatory tool might be more 
effective and also that markets will sometimes tip in a manner that is in the interests of consumers, 
even if it reinforces an already dominant platform owner. 

A  broader  market-based  tool  has  in  principle  two  advantages  over  the  dominance-based  tools 
considered  earlier.  First,  it  could  apply  to  prevent  tipping  to  an  existing,  non-dominant  firm.  We 
suspect this would only rarely be useful. Its application would amount to picking (and trying to stop) 
winners, which seems unlikely to be effective or economically efficient. Second, the remedies can 
be market-wide. This seems more likely to be useful, particularly in cases in which the remedies can 
do  more  than  simply  resist  the  economic  forces  leading  to  tipping,  but  instead  remove  them 
altogether.  For  example,  compatibility  between  different  systems  can  reduce  or  eliminate  the 
network effects that give rise to tipping. For example, if content can only be edited with a certain 
software package then the market may tip to that product; if many software packages can effectively 
edit the same file, then the pressure to tip is much reduced.  

We, therefore, conclude that in assessing whether to use Options 1 & 2 or 3 & 4 for tipping markets 
or to prevent the emergence of a gatekeeper, the relevant question is not whether the Commission 

18 

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
needs a tool to use against non-dominant firms; rather whether it needs a tool that imposes market-
wide remedies. Beyond the specific tool, one would have to address several important questions: 

(a) 

(b) 

At what point is a market sufficiently in danger of tipping to allow for intervention below the 
threshold of dominance?  Network effects matter in terms of strength, symmetry,  whether 
they are direct and/or indirect, and at what critical mass they begin to develop. The value 
and frequency of transactions also determine how likely users are to multi-home or switch 
platforms. These factors can serve as a starting point for assessing platform competition, 
but market-specific circumstances (such as behavioural biases) may also be important. 

How  can  actions  that  favour  tipping  be  distinguished  from  desirable  (albeit  aggressive) 
competition on aspects such as quality or price? Some economists suggest that one way to 
identify an anticompetitive practice is to consider whether it is profitable only if a monopoly 
position is achieved in the long term (in line with the usual test for predation in proceedings 
against  abuse  of  dominance).  However,  they  acknowledge  that  some  practices  may  be 
anticompetitive without being based on predation and that it is difficult to draw a clear line 
between the two. 

(c) 

What  the  authorities  can  do  if  they  miss  the  right  moment  to  intervene  and  the  market 
permanently tips in favour of the relevant platform? In this situation, imposing a fine may not 
be a convincing remedy. 

From an economic perspective, the proposed intervention would make a difference in markets where 
firm behaviour can be pivotal in making the market tip. As such, it is important to get the balance in 
enforcement right. Over-enforcement could be particularly harmful if additional rules on platforms in 
markets  that  are  unlikely  to  tip  prevented  firms  from  competing  vigorously  with  each  other,  or  if 
strategies that primarily enhance consumer welfare were mistaken for anticompetitive behaviour. It 
may be particularly hard to distinguish actions leading to vigorous competition from those causing 
tipping and monopolisation in nascent markets, so intervention should be undertaken with caution. 

As  noted  above,  the  Commission’s  proposed  platform-specific  ex-ante  regulation  seems  a 
potentially attractive way to address some of the underlying causes that may give rise to gatekeeper 
status or prevent the emergence of strong rivals to the gatekeeper. For example, if the status arises 
from access to specific forms of data, then this lends itself to a regulatory ex-ante solution to enable 
qualifying firms to access that specific data.  

In  cases  where  it  is  too  late  for  ex-ante  regulation  to  play  a  role,  then  a  market  structure-based 
competition  tool  may  have  a  role  to  play  –  for  example,  to  implement  remedies  relating  to 
interoperability  or  guidelines  to  facilitate  competition  in  neighbouring  markets.  Once  again,  the 
question  of  which  tool  is  more  appropriate  comes  down  to  whether  the  remedies  that  may  be 
required are market-wide or firm-specific, with market-wide remedies supporting the introduction of 
an NCT. 

3.4 

The most suitable policy option to address the identified concerns 

Above, we evaluated the effectiveness of existing and prospective new instruments in dealing with 
each of the various concerns the Commission has identified. We concluded that there are a number 
of  potential  gaps  in  existing  competition  law  that  could  be  addressed  with  an  NCT  focused  on 
promoting competition, rather than dealing solely with anti-competitive conduct.  We considered two 
broad areas of concern. 

19 

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Unilateral conduct of dominant firms 

If the focus of an investigation is unilateral conduct of a specific dominant firm, it is hard to see how 
a new dominance-based tool with a lower threshold for intervention (Options 1 and 2) could be more 
appropriate than the existing Article 102 TFEU. The conduct of dominant firms is a core concern for 
Article 102 TFEU, so if the threshold for intervention needs to be lower, that is an argument for the 
interpretation  of Article  102  TFEU  itself  (or  indeed  theoretically  its  reform),  not  for  introducing  a 
parallel instrument. If there is any conduct not currently prohibited, this is presumably because such 
conduct is not normally considered abusive, even if it can lead to anti-competitive effects. If Article 
102 TFEU does not capture such conduct, the obvious solution is to place more emphasis on effects 
within the assessment of Article 102 TFEU cases, rather than either to add additional specific forms 
of conduct to a form-based prohibition or introduce a new instrument. 

A market-based tool (Options 3 and 4) could prove useful in some instances, even when the concern 
is with the conduct of a dominant firm.  Market-wide remedies that are not limited to the dominant 
firm  (as  would  necessarily  be  the  case  under Article  102  TFEU)  can  be  more  complete  in  their 
effects. Such remedies could also be more resilient to technological or market changes: dealing with 
the potential emergence of new leading firms without needing to subject them to a new investigation.  

Structural competition problems 

If  the  focus  of  an  investigation  is  a  structural  problem  that  prevents  a  market  from  functioning 
properly, any kind of dominance-based tool – Article 102 TFEU or the new Options 1 and 2 - seems 
wholly unsuitable. First, there is no guarantee that any of the firms in the market will be dominant. 
Second,  even  if  there  were,  an  investigation  and  any  remedies  focused  on  only  a  dominant 
participant  would  not  be  effective  or  particularly  meaningful.  Even  if  the  dominant  participant’s 
behaviour changed, that would not necessarily change the behaviour of other participants or remove 
the underlying conditions that made such behaviour possible. 

A market-based tool (Options 3 and 4) that is intended to deal with features of the market that could 
have an adverse effect on competition may therefore be more effective than any of the Commission’s 
existing tools. A broader market-based tool has in principle two advantages over a dominance-based 
tool. First, it could apply to prevent anti-competitive conduct by an existing, non-dominant firm. We 
suspect this would only rarely be useful. Its application would carry a significant risk of error. Second, 
the remedies available within such a tool can be market-wide. This seems more likely to be useful, 
particularly in cases in which the remedies can do more than simply treat the symptoms of weak 
competition, but instead remove the causes altogether. 

Options 1 and 2, therefore, seem to add little to the existing instruments of competition law and, if 
they exist alongside those instruments, could result in confusion or even double jeopardy in a way 
that  is  more  likely  to  produce  economic  harm  than  good.    Furthermore,  they  are  unsuitable  for 
dealing with the most significant gaps in the current enforcement toolkit.   

We have not considered at length the distinction  between  a tool  that can  be  used in any  market 
(Option 3) and one targeted on specific markets (Option 4).  As a practical matter, it seems to us 
likely to be very difficult to define in advance the scope of the Option 4 tool and the markets to which 
it is applicable.  For example, many of the concerns relate to digital markets, but these days it is 
very hard to define what  might (or might not) constitute a  ‘digital market’.   Structural competition 
problems  could  also  potentially  materialise  in  virtually  any  industry  which  possesses  certain 
characteristics such as barriers to entry, customer lock-in, etc 

For all these reasons, we believe that a broad market structure-based tool (Option 3 or Option 4) 
would be the most effective option to address the structural competition problems identified by the 

20 

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Commission. There  is  also  a  good  argument  for  why  the  tool  should  not  be  focused  on  specific 
sectors.  

4 

What this means for the scope of the NCT 

Having identified a preference for the broadest of the new instruments under consideration by the 
Commission,  an  important  question  falls  to  be  addressed:  what  are  the  outer  limits  of  a  market-
structure  based  tool?  While  one  could  presumably  identify  a  wide  variety  of  market  failures  and 
dysfunctional markets, it does not always follow that the solution is more competition. The tool is 
intended  to  be  a  competition  instrument:  it  deals  with  failures  of  competition;  with  situations  that 
would be solved if only competition were more effective. The NCT is not a magic bullet and there 
must be outer limits to the tool, that is, problems which it is not designed to fix. With that in mind, we 
discuss two important limitations of the NCT below. 

4.1 

Consumer protection vs competition issues  

We do not think that the Commission should wield a ‘market failure tool’, conferring the ability to 
intervene in markets wherever it believes they are working poorly, for any reason.  Instead, the scope 
should be limited to the (already broad) range of competition concerns outlined above.  Markets can 
fail for  many reasons, including  informational problems and consumer behavioural  limitations,  as 
well  as  problems  of  externalities  such  as  environmental  concerns.    One  could  often  imagine  the 
world sufficiently different as to consider that ‘if only’ competition could work, then the market failure 
would be addressed, but this does not mean that in practice every market failure is a competition 
problem.  For example, environmental issues can in principle be solved by the proper allocation of 
property rights and establishing markets, but this does not mean that this is the only solution or the 
best  solution  (considering  distributional  and  other  political  issues)  to  the  problem,  nor  that  it  is  a 
problem for DG Competition. 

Substantive case for focus on competition policy  

To this end, we believe that the NCT should focus solely on competition policy and should exclude 
other policy objectives, notably consumer policy. Whereas competition policy is concerned with the 
protection of the integrity of the competitive process, and thus indirectly the welfare of consumers, 
consumer  policy  is  designed  to  directly  address  negative  outcomes  for  consumers.  In  practical 
terms, this would mean that if the NCT is intended as a competition policy tool, that is to improve the 
competitive process, it should address structural competition problems where the supply side is the 
source of the issue. In other words, it should exclude issues stemming from the demand side which 
do not relate to or affect the efficacy of the competitive process on the supply side.  

That said, the boundary between supply-side and demand-side issues is sometimes blurred. Stucke 
and Ezrachi have made compelling arguments about how demand-side issues can undermine the 
value of the competitive process itself.9 For example, while the internet has brought almost unlimited 
access to information, consumers nevertheless have limited capacity and willpower to process all 
this information. Therefore, they tend to seek heuristic information cues to simplify their decisions, 
for instance, favouring extreme positive or negative ratings as more useful than moderate ratings,10 
or  -  where  decisions  are  too  complex  -  sticking  with  the  status  quo.11  In  the  presence  of  these 

9  See Maurice E Stucke, ‘Is Competition Always Good?’ (2013) 1(1) Journal of Antitrust Enforcement 162; and more recently 
Maurice E Stucke and Ariel Ezrachi, Competition Overdose: How Free Market Mythology Transformed Us from Citizen 
Kings to Market Servants (Harper Business 2020). 

10  See Sangwon Park and Juan L Nicolau, ‘Asymmetric Effects of Online Consumer Reviews’ (2015) 50 Annals of Tourism 

Research 67.  

11  Simona Botti and Sheena S Iyengar, ‘The Dark Side of Choice: When Choice Impairs Social Welfare’ (2006) 25 Journal 

of Public Policy & Marketing 24, 28. 

21 

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
consumer biases harm may occur where instead of competing on quality, firms compete to exploit 
these biases. Firms may, for example, adopt strategies targeted at artificially inflating product ratings 
instead  of  making  genuine  efforts  to  improve  product  quality.  Alternatively,  firms  may  seek  to 
increase the complexity of decisions, making it more difficult for consumers to compare price and 
quality and choose the product that matches their preferences.12 Whether competition policy is the 
right  tool  to  address  these  issues  depends  on  whether  there  is  a  problem  with  the  competitive 
process,  and  whether  this  can  be  successfully  addressed  by  intervening  to  fix  the  competitive 
process. On the other hand, if the intervention can only be truly successful if it directly addresses 
the negative outcomes for consumers (e.g. by price regulation) then competition policy is unlikely to 
be  the  correct  instrument.  In  other  words,  competition  policy  should  not  be  concerned  with 
symptomatic or palliative treatment. Nor should competition be viewed as a cure-all, or an end unto 
itself: we must recognize that competition can be a tool to improve welfare but that we cannot solve 
all market failures by introducing competition. 

Accordingly, we believe that the scope of application of any new tool should be limited to concerns 
that  are  typically  and  widely  recognised  as  competition  problems  as  opposed  to,  for  example, 
consumer protection problems. This may well rule out addressing certain markets where competition 
is weak because of consumer behavioural issues. We pick on this case because it is difficult and 
borderline.  Companies might exploit customer ignorance or unwillingness to consider alternatives, 
to create market power, they might also deliberately seek to increase those customer behaviours to 
entrench their market positions.  In some cases, those will indeed be valid competition concerns (for 
example, because a prohibition on such conduct by the firms, or structural change in the market, 
might improve the situation).13  In other cases, however, the sole cause of the problem might be 
consumer  behaviour  itself,  in  which  case  remedies  would  focus  largely  on  educating  customers, 
changing  that  behaviour  or  helping  with,  for  example,  defaults  and  ‘nudges’.    The  latter  type  of 
investigation does not seem to us to be within the scope of competition policy or the mandate of DG 
Competition. It is more properly a matter of sectoral regulation and consumer policy. 

Administrative and procedural case for focus on competition policy  

There are also strong administrative and institutional arguments for limiting the scope of the NCT to 
competition policy issues.  

The  Commission  is  well  equipped  to  deal  with  competition  policy,  supported  by  significant 
institutional experience and a well-understood policy objective. On the other hand, if the NCT were 
to  expand  into  consumer  policy,  the  Commission  would  be  in  relatively  unchartered  waters. 
Furthermore, were the NCT to pursue (at least) a dual mandate of competition policy and consumer 
policy the Commission would be faced with the task of complex regulatory trade-offs between the 
two. These would of course only occur in “hard” cases. However, the Commission would in such 
circumstances  risk  making  decisions  concerning  issues  of  market  efficiency  vs.  “fair”  economic 
distribution  within  and  between  the  Member  States.  These  decisions  are  generally  better  left  to 
politicians  and  legislators  and  would  undermine  the  hard-won  support  for  the  EU’s  competition 
policy.  

The UK’s market investigation regime illustrates the  difficulties  of  a market  investigation tool that 
pursues  both  competition  policy  and  consumer  policy  objectives.  The  CMA’s  energy  market 
investigation struggled with the broad issue of weak customer response and lack of engagement 
with the domestic retail energy market. To address this problem, the CMA was forced to consider a 

12  See Chris M Wilson and Catherine Waddams Price, ‘Do Consumers Switch to the Best Supplier?’ (2010) 62(4) Oxford 

Economic Papers 647. 

13  We note, for example, that discriminatory conduct by dominant firms exploiting consumer biases may fall under Article 

102 (a), when the necessary conditions are present. 

22 

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
range of solutions (including a temporary price cap). This, in turn, required a balancing act: weighing 
up  the  protection  of  passive  consumers’  interests,  on  the  one  hand,  against  the  concern  that 
intervention  would  result  in  long  term  damage  to  the  competitive  process  (by  disincentivizing 
consumers from driving competition).14  

We, therefore, suggest that the Commission conveys - both through the design of the new tool and 
also  through  guidelines  and  eventually  case  practice  -  that  it  is  intended  to  remedy  competition 
failures, by promoting competition, not to deal with market failures in general and especially not to 
provide an additional instrument of consumer policy. 

4.2 

Private and public concerns 

Another important consideration is whether and how the NCT will manage situations in the public 
sector  or  where  there  are  public  interest  considerations  (as  envisaged  under  Question  30  of  the 
Consultation). In the UK, the CMA can, for example, address market failures which stem from the 
public sector as well as the private sector and has in the past identified markets (e.g. Energy) where 
regulation was hampering the effective functioning of the market.  The question of whether the NCT 
should address market failures which result from, or are impacted by, regulation or decisions of the 
State involves both policy and legal considerations.  

In  principle,  there  are  two  questions  here:  whether  the  NCT  should  concern  itself  with  public 
objectives other than competition and whether remedial action taken under the new powers should 
encompass laws, regulation or other state action.  The two are linked because a regulation that has 
an anticompetitive effect (that a Commission investigation might identify as an underlying cause of 
some competition problem) has presumably been put in place by some public body in furtherance 
of some public purpose.  If the  Commission were  empowered to remove such regulation, then  it 
would be necessary for it to assess whether the importance of the regulation in promoting that public 
purpose outweighs any malign effects on competition. 

From a policy perspective, balancing conflicting laws may be relatively straightforward where they 
pursue  similar  values,  such  as  economic  efficiency  (e.g.  as  antitrust  shares  with  sector  access 
regulation), but where they pursue different goals (e.g. sustainability, safety) it becomes difficult for 
a single institution to find the optimal balance. Similarly, it seems to us that in its role as competition 
enforcer, the Commission should focus only on competition goals in assessing conduct (public or 
private)  when  developing  the  new  tool.    Having  multiple  goals  would  not  only  detract  from  the 
Commission’s main focus but also involves value judgments of incommensurate goals.  In general, 
it is a sound principle of economic policy that a single policy goal should have one instrument to 
promote it, and problems of effectiveness, as well as legitimacy, can arise when an instrument aims 
to promote multiple social objectives.15  Of course, some valued objective such as privacy can be 
harmed  through  a  failure  of  competition  –  but  equally,  that  objective  can  be  harmed  for  reasons 
entirely unrelated to competition.  If the concern is really about privacy, it would be perverse to act 
on harm to privacy when it arises from failures of competition but not from other causes. For all of 
these  reasons,  we  believe  the  scope  of  the  new  competition  tool  should  be  limited  to  economic, 
competition  objectives,  particularly  the  consumer  welfare  standard  defined  narrowly  in  material 
terms.  

However,  we  do  not  believe  the  Commission  should  avoid  dealing  with  markets  in  which 
uncompetitive outcomes (or even anti-competitive conduct by market participants) are largely the 

14  See CMA, Energy Market Investigation (Final Report, 24 June 2016) available here accessed 7 September 2020, 15.43-

15.48.  

15   See John Davies, ‘Means and Ends in Competition Law’ in Charbit and Ahmad (eds), Standing up for Convergence and 

Relevance in Antitrust - Frédéric Jenny Liber Amicorum (Institute of Competition Law 2018). 

23 

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
result of regulations or other state action.  On the contrary, the European economy is likely to suffer 
as least as much from such anti-competitive regulation as from anti-competitive private conduct.  It 
is a sound principle in a competition investigation to identify regulatory action that may be causing 
the problem, but then instead of assessing whether the competition problem outweighs the social 
purpose behind the regulation, to seek to identify less anti-competitive ways of achieving that social 
purpose.16  For example, concerns to ensure professional standards are maintained in pharmacy or 
other  markets  concerned  with  health  do  not  necessarily  require  restrictions  on  ownership  that 
prevent the emergence of pharmacy chains, which can be highly pro-competitive.   

Nevertheless,  the  Commission  may  also  have  to  be  circumspect  about  direct  intervention  where 
there  are  non-economic  considerations  at  play,  which  indicates  that  recommendations  to  the 
legislator  may  be  more  appropriate  than  mandating  something  which  conflicts  with  existing 
regulation.  There  are  also  questions  of  legal  basis  as  regards  direct  intervention  in  the  face  of 
conflicting  national  rules  (rather  than  EU  regulation  or  laws).  On  the  one  hand,  the  Courts  have 
consistently held that the Member States have a duty under the Treaties to refrain from enacting 
laws which could prevent the effectiveness of the rules of competition.17 On the other hand, it is less 
clear how NCT decisions would interact with national laws which give rise to features which create 
structural competition problems. A law which creates a structural competition problem, to the extent 
that  it  does  not  require  an  infringement  of Articles  101  and  102  TFEU,  would  not  be  inherently 
incompatible with existing EU laws. As such, the Commission will need to think carefully about the 
relationship between any powers conferred on the Commission in relation to public regulation and 
laws and both EU and national laws.  

To summarise, if the objective of the NCT is to fully address “structural competition problems”, the 
Commission should be able to address concerns regardless of whether they stem from private or 
public conduct. The NCT should not shy away from these issues, as the underlying causes of many 
competition  problems  may  be  state  action.  Nevertheless,  it  may  be  appropriate  that  the 
Commission’s  powers  to  deal  with  these  types  of  problems  are  limited  more  to  identifying  the 
problems and suggesting less anti-competitive alternatives rather than being directly determinative. 

4.3 

Preliminary conclusions 

We have established the appropriateness of a broad-based market tool to deal with the identified 
concerns in Section 3, and the outer limits of the tool in this Section. However, the effectiveness of 
such a tool will critically depend upon designing the system properly. In particular, there would need 
to be a number of important legal safeguards, which we discuss in turn in the remaining sections.  

5 

The Need for Consistency (Q25 and Q29) 

The  NCT  consultation  touches  upon  the  need  for  a  “smooth  interaction”  with  sector-specific 
regulation. This is indeed a significant challenge, considering the risks of overlap, tension and direct 
conflict between an open-textured tool such as the NCT and sector-specific regulation that will often 
be applied by national regulatory authorities. However, there is an equally, if not more pressing need, 
for consistency of the NCT with the EU’s existing competition policy. 

The NCT poses a challenge in this regard. To some extent, the policy options would overlap with the 
Commission’s existing competition tools: Options 1 and 2 for a “dominance-based” tool would, on 
its face, overlap significantly with Article 102 TFEU while Options 3 and 4 would potentially overlap 
with both Articles 101 and 102 TFEU as well as covering issues outside their scope (e.g. unilateral 

16   The  approach  recommended  by  the  OECD  in  its  Competition  Assessment  Toolkit,  presented  along  with  examples  at 

https://www.oecd.org/competition/assessment-toolkit.htm. 

17  See Judgment of 3 March 2011, AG2R Prevoyance v Beaudout, C-437/09, EU:C:2011:112, para 24.  

24 

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
conduct by non-dominant firms). At the same time, one of the aims of the NCT is to enable swifter 
intervention18, suggesting that the Commission has in mind a lower standard for intervention than is 
currently in place under the Commission’s existing tools.  

There are however good reasons for why the design of the NCT should ensure consistency with the 
Commission’s existing competition tools. 

5.1 

The benefits of consistency for EU competition policy  

The existing framework of competition law has developed over the years to ensure robust analysis 
of  effects  on  competition,  and  the  effects  of  doing  away  with  parts  of  that  framework  should  be 
carefully considered. For example, defining the relevant market is a challenging aspect of antitrust 
cases, in particular abuse of dominance investigations. However, it is also a crucial part of rigorous 
competition analysis, without which there is little frame of reference through which to assess effects 
on  competition.  Preserving  consistency  serves,  furthermore,  two  key  objectives  in  the  effective 
administration of competition policy.  

Internal  consistency  between  the  Commission’s  different  tools  competition  tools  is  of  significant 
practical  importance  as  it  avoids  the  creation  of  perverse  incentives  where  market  participants’ 
behaviour  is  distorted  to  minimise  the  burden  imposed  by  the  regulatory  system  (for  example, 
structuring joint ventures as “non-concentrative” to avoid scrutiny under EU merger control rules (or 
vice  versa  if  market  participants  want  greater  legal  certainty).  It  also  avoids  the  temptation  for 
competition authorities to frame conduct in one way or another in order to apply a legal test with a 
lower threshold for intervention. Failure to ensure consistency in this regard would, in practical terms, 
allow the NCT to circumvent the application of competition rules, potentially undermining decades 
of accumulated practice and jurisprudence.  

More  broadly,  consistency  is  important  for  maintaining  wide  –  and  apolitical  support  –  for  EU 
competition policy. Over the past decades, significant progress has been made  by the European 
Commission  and  the  Courts  in  articulating  an  analytical  competition  law  framework  which  is 
consistent in the assessment of mergers, agreements between undertakings and unilateral conduct 
of  dominant  companies.  The  reliability  of  the  underlying  analytical  framework,  which  has  been 
developed and stress-tested across a range of different contexts and on all market structures, has 
given credibility to competition law as an objective, fair and apolitical legal tool to ensure the proper 
functioning of markets. Undermining this credibility would be damaging not only to the development 
and implementation of the NCT but also to the Commission’s administration of its other competition 
instruments.   

5.2  Weak case for why consistency is not necessary for the NCT 

Furthermore, the arguments put forward for why there is only a limited need for consistency between 
the NCT and the Commission’s existing competition instruments are not compelling.  

Lack of “infringement” under the NCT does not justify a different standard 

Some  have  argued  that  the  sui  generis  nature  of  a  market  investigation  tool  means  that  its 
introduction  has  limited  ramifications  for  wider  competition  policy.  In  particular,  because  the  NCT 
would not require a finding of culpability (as it does not result in the imposition of fines or infringement 
decisions), it is argued that there is little need to ensure consistency with the existing competition 

18  For example, Question 25 asks whether the NCT which ‘would not establish an infringement by a company and would not 
result  in  fines’  should  be  permitted  to  ‘prevent  structural  competition  problems  from  arising  and  thus  allow  for  early 
intervention  in  the  markets  concerned?’  The  consultation  document  also  notes  that  intervention  in  markets  prone  to 
“tipping” to prevent the ‘emergence’ of ‘gatekeepers’ could be achieved ‘by early intervention’. 

25 

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
rules  and  that  precedent  can  be  eschewed.19  Amelia  Fletcher  has,  for  example,  drawing  a 
comparison with the UK Market Investigation regime, observed that the lack of culpability means 
that  there  is  (or  should  be)  ‘more  freedom  to  carry  out  economic  analysis  without  being  unduly 
constrained by the policy approaches and precedent from past cases.’20 

However, there is a strong argument that the lack of “infringement” or “fines” under the NCT is not a 
sufficient ground for lowering the standard for intervention.  

Fines under Articles 101 and 102 TFEU do not, as such, determine the content of these provisions 
but are rather an instrument to deter violations and resulting enrichment.21 The content of antitrust 
prohibitions is, broadly speaking, determined by balancing the likely harms and efficiencies of the 
conduct at issue. Indeed, the costs considered by the Courts in determining the content of antitrust 
prohibitions have typically been the chilling effects on preventing efficient conduct.22 Furthermore, 
remedies carry significant costs irrespective of whether firms can be fined or suffer the stigma of 
infringement.  The  Commission’s  Impact  Assessment  assumes  that  consumers  will  benefit  from 
intervention under the NCT, and this will outweigh the costs of the remedy implementation.23 This 
overlooks the fact that poorly designed or unnecessary remedies can themselves result in negative 
outcomes  for  consumers  which,  rather  than  counterbalancing,  compounds  the  costs  of  remedy 
implementation. If there are no limiting principles on the NCT, the resulting legal uncertainty would 
likely have significant chilling effects on investment and innovation.  

The lack of “infringement” or “fines” under the NCT also does not provide a strong legal basis for a 
different (lower) standard to Article 101 and 102 TFEU. In any event, from a practical perspective is 
very little “gap” between the potential “no-fault” NCT and the existing competition rules as Articles 
101 and 102 TFEU to justify a lower standard for intervention.  Article 101 and 102 TFEU are already 
highly  flexible  tools  from  a  procedural  perspective  that  already  permit  the  “no-fault”  intervention 
potentially envisaged by the Commission under the NCT. The Commission can, for example, opt to 
pursue relatively “novel” cases and not impose a fine, with the Commission enjoying ‘a wide margin 
of discretion’  in levying penalties.24 Besides, the Commission may also enter into commitments with 
firms to address potentially problematic conduct without a finding of either an infringement (or a fine). 
So, while the use of the commitments procedure is in the hands of the firms under investigation as 
well as the Commission, it offers a flexible means of intervention commensurate with the gravity of 
the potential infringement.  

Earlier intervention can be achieved under the NCT or under the Commission’s existing tools 

In  any  event,  we  see  no  reason  why  the  Commission  cannot  facilitate  more  timely  intervention 
without undermining the consistency of EU competition policy.  

19  Amelia Fletcher, ‘Market Investigations for Digital Platforms: Panacea or Complement?’ Centre for Competition Policy of 
University of East Anglia (6 August 2020) available at <https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3668289> 
accessed 7 September 2020. 

20  Ibid. 
21  See Wouter Wils, ‘Optimal Antitrust Fines: Theory and Practice’ (2006) 29(2) World Competition 183. Nevertheless, as 

noted above, the content of the prohibitions must be sufficiently clear in order to justify fines.   

22  For instance, the requirement that in refusal to supply cases that it is unreasonably difficult to establish an alternative is 

clearly focussed on ensuring maintaining incentives to invest.  

23  Impact Assessment: “…these remedies would increase costs for the companies concerned. The proportionality of the 
costs incurred would be ensured by the fact that such remedies have to be limited to ensuring the proper functioning of 
the market under scrutiny. Consumer benefits deriving from the timely intervention under all policy options should outweigh 
those costs.”  

24  Guidelines on the method of setting fines imposed pursuant to Article 23(2)(a) of Regulation 1/2003 [2006] OJ C210/2, 

para 2. 

26 

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
By introducing a policy to address conduct and market features that are likely to give rise to structural 
competition problems (i.e. intervention so that markets can “self-correct” through improving existing 
market mechanisms), the Commission would be able to take remedial action without the need to 
establish dominance or a concerted practice. Thus, by its very nature, the NCT would presumably 
permit  earlier  intervention  than  would  otherwise  be  permissible  under  the  Commission’s  existing 
competition tools.  

On  the  other  hand,  if  the  goal  is  to  relax  existing  requirements  under  established  case  law,  for 
example,  the  onerous  refusal  to  supply  standard  or  the  requirement  to  define  markets,  the 
Commission  should  make  these  arguments  before  the  Courts  so  that  they  can  be  resolved  in  a 
manner  which  is  consistent  with  the  existing  framework  under  the  Treaties.  Moreover,  if  the 
Commission’s principal concern is an inability to complete conventional antitrust cases before the 
harm has occurred, due to administrative inflexibility, it may be that reform of the “interim measures” 
regime  would  be  a  more  effective  way  to  achieve  this  purpose.25  This  would  allow  for  a  lower 
standard  for  intervention,  subject  to  the  caveat  that  a  more  complete  analysis  will  ultimately  be 
completed and harm, if any, from unnecessary remedies reversed.   

5.3 

Consistency between the NCT and the Commission’s existing antitrust tools  

The case for ensuring consistency for “overlapping” issues 

Depending  on  which  of  the  options  is  adopted,  there  will  be  a  greater  or  less  degree  of  overlap 
between the NCT and the existing competition law framework: Options 1 and 2 would result in the 
NCT significantly overlapping with Article 102 TFEU while Options 3 and 4 would partially overlap 
with both Articles 101 and 102 TFEU (as well as covering a range of additional issues).  

Given the need for consistency of legal standard applied to the same conduct (i.e. same facts), this 
poses significant difficulties for Options 1 and 2 as their practical utility – as a form of alternative for 
intervening  against  dominant  firms  –  would  be  limited.  To  this  end,  if  the  Commission  is  firmly 
convinced that the standard for intervention under Article 102 TFEU is too high, these are arguments 
to make before the Courts on the interpretation of Article 102 TFEU as this would avoid the confusion 
of introducing a separate legal regime. The same problem applies – albeit less acutely – to Options 
3 and 4 with the need for the NCT to apply the same standard to the same facts as under Article 
101  and  102  TFEU  (as  otherwise  the  Commission’s  existing  competition  instruments  risk  being 
rendered practically redundant).  

More practically, there will be a clear need for a priority rule to set out in what circumstances the 
NCT should apply, and in what circumstances only the traditional application of Article 101 and 102 
TFEU  should  be  permitted.  This  is  critical  for  ensuring  coherence.  This  requires  a  clear  and 
predictable  set  of  rules  which  dictates  which  of  the  legal  tools  –  the  NCT  or  existing  rules  –  is 
applicable. Effectively, this means clearly defined scenarios where existing competition rules are not 
“effective” and thus the NCT may kick into action. For example, the UK’s market investigation regime 
is clear that a market investigation should only be pursued where (a) there are ‘reasonable grounds 
to  suspect’  ‘features’  of  a  market-distorting  competition  but  there  are  not  sufficient  grounds  to 
establish a breach of its conventional competition tools, or (b) conventional competition tools are 
‘likely to be ineffective.’26  

25  Recently, the idea to make more effective use of interim measures, for example, has gained attention. See e.g Despoina 
Mantzari, ‘Interim Measures  in  EU  Competition  Cases:  Origins,  Evolution,  and  Implications for  Digital  Markets’  (2020) 
JECLAP.  

26  OFT, Market investigation references – Guidance about the making of references under Part 4 of the Enterprise Act (2006) 

available here, para 2.3. 

27 

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
If the NCT is adopted, the Commission should therefore issue guidance which clearly explains the 
scenarios in which conventional competition tools are likely to be considered ineffective (and thus 
where the NCT applies). In this regard, the effectiveness of existing rules to address certain conduct 
must not be conflated with the ease of intervention. The UK market investigation regime provides 
some  example  on  the  types  of  situations  which  may  be  considered.  For  example,  the  CMA’s 
guidance states that single firm conduct will generally not be considered for market investigations, 
except where the conduct stems from market features which have negative effects themselves. In 
contrast,  the  NCT  Impact  Assessment  seems  to  indicate  that  the  NCT  will  address  single-firm 
conduct. The Commission should therefore be clear on the circumstances in which (and why) it will 
consider certain single firm conduct cases under the NCT, and others under existing antitrust rules, 
as this is not currently clear. For example, will the NCT only be used for single firm conduct where 
the problem cannot be fully addressed by requiring that firm to change its conduct? Many similar 
questions  will  fall  to  be  considered,  and  the  Commission  will  need  to  address  these  clearly  in 
guidance on the priority rule. 

The case for consistency for non-overlapping issues 

There  is  also  a  need,  albeit  more  subtle,  for  consistency  in  the  application  of  the  Commission’s 
existing tools and the NCT (even where there is no overlap between the two in a particular case) in 
order to preserve the overall coherency of EU competition policy.  

As outlined in Section 2, the NCT would potentially cover a range of conduct and issues that are 
more  or  less  likely  to  give  rise  to  competition  concerns. These  issues  then  have  the  potential  to 
translate into different legal tests depending on the relative likelihood of issues being “problematic”. 
To  preserve  the  coherency  of  competition  policy,  relative  standards  must  be  preserved 
notwithstanding  the  use  of  different  instruments  for  intervention  (e.g.  under  the  NCT, Article  101 
TFEU and Article 102 TFEU).  

Taking a specific example, unilateral conduct of non-dominant firms is generally presumed to be less 
likely to have harmful effects on competition than conduct by dominant firms. In that context, it would 
be incongruous if the NCT were to apply a lower standard of intervention against unilateral conduct 
by non-dominant firms than applies to unilateral conduct by dominant firms under Article 102 TFEU. 
Perversely, this may result in greater regulatory intervention, due to the lower standard, in respect 
of conduct outside the scope of existing antitrust prohibitions, which is by its nature less likely to be 
harmful (and more likely to be efficient) than prohibited conduct.   

6 

Remedies (Q30 – Q34, Q36, Q38)  

At the heart of the NCT, and what would set it apart from the Commission existing Sector Inquiry 
tool, will be its power to address the problems which it identifies. As the Consultation sets out, there 
is  a  range  of  imaginable  forms  of  intervention  from  non-binding  recommendations  or  mandated 
remedies, through to legislative or regulatory proposals. One of the principal challenges under the 
NCT will be to ensure appropriate and proportionate intervention. It is one thing to identify where 
markets “are not working well”, but it is quite another to identify where intervention (and which type 
of intervention) would improve the functioning of the market. 

In this section, we discuss three important issues which we consider should shape the boundaries 
of the Commission’s remedial powers under the NCT: 

(a) 

The  central  role  which  remedies  play  in  the  NCT  process  and  the  need  to  identify  the 
potential remedies which address the potential (structural) competition problems early in the 
Commission’s process. 

28 

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
(b) 

(c) 

6.1 

The scope of remedial powers  

The  need  for  any  remedies  imposed  under  the  NCT  to  adhere  to  the  principle  of 
proportionality. 

The need to identify a remedy that addresses the competition concerns early on in 
the process 

There is significant merit in the early identification of remedies. First, this allows the Commission to 
define the correct counterfactual and make a proper competitive assessment. Second, it ensures 
that investigations are not pursued where there is no plausible competition remedy.  

The need for a counterfactual for a robust competitive assessment 

While relevant for all competition policy matters, the counterfactual presents a particular challenge 
for market investigation regimes, where  the scope of potential  intervention  is broad and possibly 
market-wide.  

Under the merger control rules and Article 101 TFEU, the counterfactual is relatively straightforward. 
In the case of merger control, it is a world in which the merger will be prohibited (whether this is the 
status quo or an alternative scenario). In the case of Article 101 TFEU, it is the world without the 
restriction or, if the restriction is ancillary to an agreement, the world without the agreement. In the 
case of an abuse of dominance control under Article 102 TFEU, the situation is more complex. Again, 
the counterfactual is a world without the abusive behaviour but what such a world looks like will in 
part be determined by the remedy. An unbundling remedy will lead to a different counterfactual than 
a “must-carry” remedy – as the Commission has found out to its cost in Microsoft I (WMP). Failing 
to engage with the remedy counterfactual, and the need to balance this with the status quo thus 
the 
risks 
counterbalancing benefits to the competitive process. 

impose  additional  costs  on  businesses  without 

remedies,  which 

ineffective 

The  counterfactual  in  a  market  investigation  is  even  more  elusive.  As  there  is  no  prohibited 
behaviour,  the  counterfactual  cannot  be  defined  by  a  world  in  where  the  unlawful  behaviour  has 
ceased.  Instead,  the  counterfactual  will  be  linked  to  an  array  of  potentially  problematic  market 
features and conduct. In some cases, the counterfactual will remain straightforward: e.g. but for the 
relevant  market  feature  (e.g.  conduct  prohibiting  multi-homing)  would  the  market  be  more 
competitive?  However,  in  other  cases,  the  market  features  are  likely  to  give  rise  to  uncertain 
counterfactuals  as  the  new  “normal”  is  not  clear  (e.g.  whether  a  lack  of  interoperability  is  stifling 
competition). The Commission may be relatively in the dark as to the likely effects of intervention 
and will struggle to balance this against the status quo. Faced with the scenario, one might consider 
whether it is better to regulate the devil you know rather than mandate the devil you don’t. 

In any case, clear identification of the proposed remedy is a necessary starting point to even attempt 
to weigh up the costs and benefits of intervention. For example, if there is a perceived problem of 
lack  of  interoperability,  is  the  appropriate  counterfactual  a  scenario  where  partial  or  full 
interoperability is permitted and are all firms or only the dominant firm (if there is one) deemed to be 
providing interoperability? Absent clarity on the nature of the remedies, the Commission is likely to 
struggle  to  determine  whether  intervention  is  beneficial.  The  remedy  and  the  counterfactual  are 
inseparable,  and  the  counterfactual  is  necessary  to  evaluate  the  status  quo.  As  such,  the 
Commission must be able to conceive of an alternatively functioning market before it can speak to 
the problems of the existing market. 

This is illustrated by the UK market investigation regime, which imposes an obligation on the CMA 
to consider feasible remedies. This has led to decisions not to take a market investigation forward 
where  no  clear-cut  remedies  could  be  identified.  For  example,  in  Private  Motor  Insurance,  the 

29 

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Competition  Commission  found  that  it  was  unable  to  remedy  the  inefficiencies  with  the  available 
remedies because they did not provide an effective and proportionate solution.27 The Courts in the 
UK  have  also  rejected  market  investigation  remedies  where  the  competition  authorities  failed 
properly  to  assess  the  impact  of  the  remedies,  and  how  consumers  would  respond.28  It  is  not 
sufficient  to  merely  assert  that  structural  problems  exist  and  assume  that  a  specific  remedy  will 
correct them (without  any  unintended consequences). The UK market  investigation regimein this 
way provides a helpful illustration of what can go wrong if the question of a suitable remedy is not 
being sufficiently thought through in advance.  

The need to ensure plausible competition remedies exist to justify pursuing an investigation 

Remedy design is complex, especially in fast-moving dynamic markets such as the digital sphere. 
An  obligation  to  identify  plausible  remedies  early  in  the  process  would  aid  the  Commission  in 
determining  whether  the  NCT  is  an  appropriate  instrument  to  address  the  alleged  structural 
competition problems. While the NCT may, in theory, be capable of identifying a large number of 
market imperfections and resulting concerns, not all of them can be effectively remedied nor are the 
countervailing  costs  of  such  remedies  straightforward. To  illustrate  this,  as  discussed  in  detail  in 
Sections 2 and 3, one of the Commission’s key concerns is maintaining competitive pressure on 
market “gatekeepers” (i.e. quasi-dominant online platforms) and ensuring that markets do not unduly 
“tip”  towards  a  single  platform.  There  is  a  range  of  theoretical  remedies  for  such  concerns:  e.g. 
facilitating  multi-homing  or  prohibiting  conduct  designed  to  ensure  incompatible  standards. 
Remedies  which  ensure  interoperability  between  different  systems  can  reduce  or  eliminate  the 
network effects that give rise to tipping. However, these remedies carry different costs and may be 
more or less feasible depending on the circumstances.29 Indeed, interoperability may not always be 
economically or technically feasible.  Moreover,  even  if full  interoperability could  be achieved, the 
nature and frequency of interaction with platforms may mean users are in any case unlikely to multi-
home or switch platforms.  

If a plausible remedy which addresses the competition concern cannot be identified, it makes little 
sense to pursue an in-depth investigation. A requirement to identify plausible remedies at an early 
stage would therefore ensure that the costs of an in-depth investigation would only be expended if 
there  is  a  reasonable  prospect  of  any  concern  (should  it  exist)  being  capable  of  being  remedied 
(without the cost outweighing the benefits of intervention). This does not require the Commission to 
have  decided  on  a  remedy  before  conducting  an  in-depth  investigation,  but  to  at  least  have 
established the plausibility of some form of remedy for the alleged structural competition problems 
in question.  

This approach would also be consistent with the UK market investigation regime which provides that 
the CMA should, inter alia, only consider launching a market investigation where (i) the scale of the 

27  CMA, Private Motor Insurance Market Investigation (Final Report 2014), para 12.17 
28  In Payment Protection Insurance (PPI), the OFT at the time stressed the importance of obtaining empirical evidence of 
the  likely  effects  of  remedies  on  consumers  when  designing  demand-side  remedies,  cautioning  that  the  theory  of 
behavioural  economics  needs  to  be  supported  with  empirical  evidence.  In  the  ensuing  market  investigation,  the  CC 
considered that consumers may face behavioural biases at the point of sale in purchasing a primary product (e.g. a loan) 
and in choosing whether to buy an add-on product when it is offered (e.g. PPI). Part of the package of remedies proposed 
by the CC was to prohibit credit providers from selling PPI as an add-on at the point of sale of the primary product, and 
for up to seven days afterwards. However, the CAT rejected this remedy as the CC had provided insufficient evidence of 
how  consumers  would  respond  to  it,  whether  it  would  benefit  them,  and  how  this  would  weigh  against  the  loss  of 
convenience to consumers. The CC subsequently undertook consumer surveys and a number of experiments to obtain 
further evidence, before confirming the point-of-sale prohibition. It is not enough to assert that biases exist, and that a 
specific  remedy  will  correct  them.  In  practice,  such  evidence  might  be  obtained  from  the  empirical  literature,  the 
experimental literature, by undertaking experimental analysis, or by undertaking other forms of ‘road testing’ of remedies.  
29  See the “topsy-turvy principle” outlined first by Jean-Charles Rochet and Jean Tirole, ‘Two-Sided Markets: An Overview’ 

(IDEI-CEPR conference on Two-Sided Markets, Toulouse, January 2004).   

30 

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
suspected problem, in terms of its adverse effect on competition, is such that a reference would be 
an appropriate response; and (ii) ‘there is a reasonable chance that appropriate remedies will be 
available.’30 Potential remedies are now considered from the start of the process, and sometimes 
even (informally) before the launch of a formal Market Investigation. This creates valuable additional 
time  compared  to  a  scenario  where  remedies  are  only  considered  once  adverse  structural 
competition problems have been identified.31 For example, the CMA opted not to take refer Online 
Platforms and Digital Advertising (2020) for a market investigation despite having identified prima 
facie  concerns  because  the  CMA  did  not,  in  part,  have  suitable  remedial  powers  to  address  the 
relevant issues.32 The procedure should also allow for sufficient time to design and test behavioural 
remedies (e.g. through controlled trials).  

In summary, therefore, there is merit to having a legal test that requires a clear link between the 
harm (i.e. the structural risk or lack of competition under the NCT) and the remedy.33 This would also 
guard against overenforcement or unnecessary intervention. It will also require the Commission to 
think through the impact of remedies, bearing in mind for example that consumers may make rational 
decisions not to engage in a market where this would provide little utility gain relative to the effort 
involved.  Simply  assuming  that  greater  choice  is  desired  by  consumers  will  tend  to  result  in 
ineffective and/or unnecessary remedies. 

6.2 

Scope of remedial powers (Q30 – 34)  

The Consultation seeks views on the scope of the Commission’s remedial powers under the NCT 
broadly  distinguishing  between  “soft”  remedial  powers  to  recommend  regulatory  and  legislative 
changes (see Question 30) and conventional remedial powers to require/impose behavioural and / 
or structural remedies from private undertakings (See Question 32).    

The nature of remedies considered 

Remedies can, in broad terms, be divided in two ways: first, between behavioural remedies (which 
require firms to change their conduct) and structural remedies (which require firms to divest assets 
or businesses); and, second, between remedies pertaining to the private sector (i.e. obligations on 
undertakings) and remedies pertaining to the public sector (i.e. obligations on, or recommendations 
for,  public  bodies  including  the  EU  itself).  Remedies  can  also  be  conceived  as  either  prohibitory 
(prohibiting certain types of conduct) or mandatory (requiring firms to take positive actions). In this 
regard,  structural  remedies  are  inherently  mandatory  (as  they  require  firms  to  divest  and  /  or 
separate part of their business) while behavioural remedies can be both prohibitory (e.g. a remedy 
requiring  a  dominant  firm  to  cease  using  exclusivity  rebates)  or  mandatory  (e.g.  an  obligation  to 
provide access). 

The scope of the Commission’s remedial powers for private undertakings should not, in principle, 
give rise to points of contention. The existing remedial powers under Regulation 1/2003 provide the 
Commission  with  the  ability  to  impose  any  form  of  structural  or  behavioural  remedy  on  private 
parties. In particular, the Commission is entitled to impose ‘any behavioural or structural remedies 
which  are  proportionate  to  the  infringement  committed  and  necessary  to  bring  the  infringement 

30  OFT, Market investigation references – Guidance about the making of references under Part 4 of the Enterprise Act (2006) 

available here (original text has been adopted unamended by the CMA). 

31  Amelia Fletcher, ‘Market Investigations for Digital Platforms: Panacea or Complement?’ Centre for Competition Policy of 
University of East Anglia (6 August 2020) available at <https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3668289> 
accessed 7 September 2020. 

32  CMA, Online platforms and digital advertising (Market study final report, 1 July 2020) available here, see 9.30. The CMA’s 
decision  rested  “primarily  on  whether  [a  market  investigation]  is  the  most  appropriate  and  effective  mechanism  for 
delivering the kinds of interventions we are proposing”. 

33  This presupposes of course that the legal test requires clear identification of the harm (see section 5 above). 

31 

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
effectively to an end.’34 While the market structure-based tool would cover a significantly wider range 
of issues and thus inevitably a wider set of regulatory solutions, the Commission’s existing powers 
already provide significant flexibility. There is thus no need to expand or loosen the Commission’s 
these already significant remedial powers.  

The use of remedies in practice throws up, however, more far-reaching issues of how to achieve an 
appropriate  balance  between  Type  1  Errors  (under-enforcement)  and  Type  2  Errors  (over- 
enforcement). This  is  because  many  of  the  issues  that  the  Commission  is  proposing  to  address 
under the NCT – outlined in Section 2 – are likely to require mandatory remedies. For example, the 
access remedies entailed by interoperability would require the Commission to mandate undertakings 
to  provide  access  on  terms  to  be  determined  by  the  Commission.  Mandatory  behavioural  and 
structural  remedies  require  inherently  more  complex  trade-offs  than  prohibitory  remedies:  in  the 
case of the former, the “factual” is more complicated as this depends on the terms of the positive 
obligation while in the case of divestment there is a significantly greater risk of chilling effects given 
that such remedies undermine legal certainty. A robust proportionality standard, therefore, becomes 
critical, as discussed further below.   

Remedies designed to address competition concerns 

Also, there is a question about whether the Commission should have the power to impose remedies 
which fall outside the scope of addressing “structural competition problems”. Logically, this ties in 
closely with our assessment in Section 4 on limits to the scope of the NCT.  

As far as the balance between competition and consumer policy is concerned, this can be framed 
as  a  question  of  whether  Commission  can  only  address  the  cause  of  the  potential  structural 
competition problem (i.e. by improving the competitive process) or can also address the symptoms 
of  structural  competition  problem  (e.g.  by  prohibiting  conduct  that  “exploits”  the  structural 
competition problem). As we outlined in Section 4.1, these types of decisions entail complex trade-
offs and the balancing of a multitude of interests and rights. In practical terms: will the Commission 
have the power to price regulate or not? If so, this would confer on the Commission powers to which 
it is not best suited – given its focus on competition policy – and would undermine the overriding 
principle  that  EU  competition  policy  is  intended  to  ensure  that  markets  are  efficient  rather  than 
determine  where  markets  themselves  may  not  deliver  optimal  outcomes.  It  would  require  the 
Commission  to  know  what  the  “right”  outcomes  for  consumers  are,  and  then  deliver  the  “right” 
outcome whether or not the competitive process  is capable of doing so.  This strays outside the 
realms  of  competition  policy.  Accordingly,  where  the  Commission  is  unable  to  improve  the 
competitive  process,  it  should  not  have  broad  powers  to  impose,  for  example,  industry  price 
regulation.  Such  measures  are  better  left  to  sector-specific  regulators  and,  if  necessary,  the 
Commission  could  make  recommendations  as  such.  This  ensures  consistency  with  the 
Commission’s  existing  powers  under  Regulation  1/2003  (which  are  limited  to  ceasing  the 
infringement)  as  well  as  ensuring  that  the  Commission  does  not  become  a  de  facto  sectoral 
regulator. 

That is not to say that the NCT should not intervene on the demand side of the market. Indeed, even 
under existing antitrust rules, without understanding how consumers engage with a market and how 
they  will  respond  to  certain  changes,  it  is  extremely  difficult  to  design  effective  consumer-facing 
remedies. Building on our assessment in Section 4.1, remedies could address demand-side issues 
where  firms  deliberately  seek  to  leverage  customer  biases  to  entrench  their  market  position. 
Examples might include failing to provide clear and comparable information, refusing to deal with 

34  Council Regulation (EC) No 1/2003 of 16 December 2002 on the implementation of the rules on competition laid down in 

Articles 81 and 82 of the Treaty [2003] OJ L1/1, Article 7. 

32 

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
price comparison website services, including contractual terms that make switching costly or making 
the process of switching cumbersome. Firms could be required to make changes to their conduct in 
these areas. While these interventions may be designed to account for certain consumer biases, 
they  can  have  very  significant  implications  for  competition,  even  in  relatively  unconcentrated 
markets.35 

Finally, the Commission’s potential powers to remedy competition “problems” created in part or in 
full by national or EU legislation or regulation give rise to complex questions of the Commission’s 
role and, even more broadly, the EU’s power to intervene to correct – or propose corrections to – 
national or EU legislation (see Section 4.2 above). There are, however, good reasons for the NCT 
to have at least some powers to bridge the public / private divide. At its most simple, this is so that 
the  NCT  can  address  market  failures  stemming  from  public  regulation  and  legislation  as  well  as 
market failures that stem from market structure or the conduct of firms. Indeed, where markets are 
effectively  protected from competition by  poorly designed regulation it is  both more effective and 
ultimately less  burdensome to remove  those constraints than  to seek to control the behaviour of 
firms  within  that  market  reacting  in  an  economically  rational  way  (for  example  by  raising  prices).  
While in some cases, regulations will have a conflicting social objective, the Commission could still 
recommend that the regulation be redesigned, if possible to promote that purpose without harming 
competition. Such remedies also have analogies with the Commission’s existing powers which, for 
example,  enable 
legislation,  regulations  or 
administrative measures which ‘put public undertakings and undertakings to which they grant special 
or exclusive rights in a position which the said undertakings could not themselves attain by their own 
conduct’ without infringing Article 102 TFEU.36 

intervention  where  Member  States  maintain 

6.3 

The need for proportionality (Q31) 

It is well established in the jurisprudence of the European Courts that any remedy imposed by the 
Commission under Article 7 of Regulation No. 1/2003 is subject to the principle of proportionality (in 
the broad sense of the word).37 This key tenet of European law requires that “measures adopted by 
the Commission do not exceed the limits of what is appropriate and necessary in order to attain the 
objectives  legitimately  pursued  by  the  act  in  question”.38  More  specifically,  the  principle  of 
proportionality implies a three-legged test: 

 

 

First, the remedy has to be ‘appropriate’ or ‘adequate’ or ‘suitable’ in the sense of actually 
addressing the harm at issue – and not some other kind of harm – and addressing it fully or 
effectively (i.e. the principle of effectiveness). 

Second,  the  remedy  has  to  be  necessary,  in  the  sense  that,  where  there  are  several 
appropriate measures, recourse must be had to the least onerous or burdensome (i.e. the 

35  Amelia Fletcher, ‘Market Investigations for Digital Platforms: Panacea or Complement?’ Centre for Competition Policy of 
University of East Anglia (6 August 2020) available at <https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3668289> 
accessed 7 September 2020. 

36  Judgment  of  13  December  1991,  Régie  des  Télégraphes  et  des  Téléphones  (RTT)  v  GB-Inno-BM  SA,  C-18/88, 

EU:C:1991:474, para 20. 

37  Judgment of 17 September 2007, Microsoft v Commission, T-201/04, EU:T:2007:289, para 1258; Judgment of 27 June 
2012, Microsoft v Commission, T-167/08, EU:T:2012:323, para 85; Order of 10 July 2001, Irish Sugar v Commission, C-
497/99P, EU:C:2001:393, para 15; Judgment of 11 March 1999, Eurofer v Commission, T-136/94, EU:T:1999:45, para 
271; Judgment of 10 April 2008, Deutsche Telekom v Commission, T-271/03, EU:T:2008:101, para 252; Judgment of 30 
June 2016, Cartes Bancaires v Commission, T-491/07, EU:T:2012:633, para 440; and Judgment of 14 May 1998, Gruber 
Weber v Commission, T-310/94, EU:T:1998:92, para 172. 

38  Council Regulation (EC) No 1/2003 of 16 December 2002 on the implementation of the rules on competition laid down in 
Articles 81 and 82 of the Treaty [2003] OJ L1/1, Article 7 and Judgment of the Court of 29 June 2010, Alrosa, C-441/07P, 
EU:C:2010:377, para 39. 

33 

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
principle of subsidiarity). To ensure this, the Commission can ask the undertaking concerned 
to propose remedies. 

 

Third, the disadvantages caused must not be disproportionate to the aims pursued. This is 
also known as “proportionality stricto sensu”. Interestingly, this leg of the test is a fairly recent 
import in the area of EU competition law,39 and even in the EU competition case law, it is 
not  consistently  applied.  This  is  partly  because  it  can  conflict  with  the  principle  of 
effectiveness.40 Indeed, although in the abstract this may be seen as good policy (as it is 
essentially a cost-benefit analysis), it is difficult to apply in the sphere of antitrust remedies 
because the costs and benefits are not borne by the same person (or at least by two groups 
of comparable importance). In an antitrust context, implementing the remedy is a cost for 
the undertaking (a private interest) while it benefits the public interest.41 

As outlined above the intended subject matter of the NCT is inherently likely to involve more complex 
remedy scenarios such as mandatory remedy access remedies. This necessitates a wider and more 
complex universe of remedies. In other words, with a broader set of issues inevitably also comes a 
potentially  broader  set  of  remedies.  The  breadth  of  potential  remedy  types,  and  the  ability  and 
flexibility to develop a package of remedies, is likely to be especially valuable for the Commission 
under  the  NCT,  given  the  complex  set  of  drivers  for  the  issues  arising  in  many  digital  markets. 
However, while these powers are likely essential for the success of the NCT, it is imperative to ensure 
any remedies adhere to the principle of proportionality. 

All else being equal, the more complex the remedies, the more difficult it is to properly establish their 
effects against the appropriate counterfactual and to determine whether the remedy is proportionate 
(i.e. the law of unintended consequences). 

This  complexity  is,  as  such,  not  inherently  problematic:  remedies  could,  in  theory,  be  tailored  to 
address any concern. However, it is not always wise to do so. More complex trade-offs in behavioural 
concerns  translate  into  more  complicated  trade-offs  for  determining  effective  remedies.  Such 
concerns  are  most  pertinent  where  remedies  seek  to  re-engineer  significantly  the  “how”  of  the 
competitive process. This raises the risk that remedies may be disproportionate to the competition 
concern.  Indeed,  while  standard  competition  law  remedies  tend  to  be  narrow  and  backwards-
looking, remedies under the NCT can be forward-looking and market-wide, with remedies applying 
across the market, irrespective of individual firm market power, much like under the UK regime.42 In 
sum,  the  more  intrusive  the  remedy  the  more  likely  it  will  be  to  have  unintended  and  negative 
consequences.  More  complex  (behavioural)  remedies,  therefore,  merit  careful  consideration  and 
caution to ensure adherence to the principle of proportionality. 

39  See, e.g., TI Harbo, ‘The Function of the Proportionality Principle in EU Law’ (2010) 16(2) European Law Journal 158, 
181: ‘the final test of the proportionality principle, the stricto sensu test, has also been perceived as rather of an arbitrary 
nature’; M Wimmer, ‘The Dinghy’s Rudder: General Principles of European Union Law Through the Lens of Proportionality’ 
(2014)  20(2)  European Public  Law  331,  338:  ‘The stricto sensu test  is  however  not systematically  conducted’;  and W 
Sauter, ‘Proportionality in EU Competition Law’ (2014) 35 European Competition Law Review 327, 327: ‘in most instances 
step four — balancing or proportionality per se — is often left out completely.’ 

40  But see E De Smijter and L Kjolbye, ‘The Enforcement System Under Regulation 1/2003’ in J Faull and A Nikpay (eds), 
The EU Law of Competition (3rd edn, OUP 2014), 124: ‘If one proportionate remedy is more effective than other available 
remedies, the Commission can impose the most effective one’; and ibid 125: ‘The Commission is not obliged to choose a 
less effective behavioural remedy if a structural remedy is more effective’. 

41  Cyril Ritter, ‘How Far Can the Commission Go When Imposing Remedies for Antitrust Infringements?’ (2016) 7(9) JECLAP 

587. 

42  Amelia Fletcher, ‘Market Investigations for Digital Platforms: Panacea or Complement?’ Centre for Competition Policy of 
University of East Anglia (6 August 2020) available at <https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3668289> 
accessed 7 September 2020. 

34 

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 

Procedural Safeguards (Q33 – Q38) 

To comply with the principle of sound administration in Article 41 of the CFR and the right to judicial 
review under Article 47 of the CFR, as well as to ensure that the NCT is not perceived as a shortcut 
to avoid the application of the strict standards of Articles 101 and 102 TFEU, there must be sufficient 
procedural safeguards in place whilst at the same time ensuring the NCT is capable of addressing 
the market failures in its scope. 

7.1 

Investigative powers under NCT (Q33) 

To make conclusions on the functioning of the market in general, the  European  Commission will 
need  to  be  able  to  request  information  from  a  variety  of  market  participants.  To  this  end,  the 
Commission  will  require  similar  powers  to  request  information  as  it  has  under  the  EUMR  and 
Regulation  1/2003.  In  general,  given  the  broad  scope  of  investigations  and  to  avoid  placing 
unnecessary  burdens  on  business  where  no  wrongdoing  is  suspected,  the  Commission  should 
favour  issuing  simple  requests  for  information.  However,  given  the  need  to  conclude  NCT 
investigations  in a  timely  and efficient  manner, it would be appropriate for the Commission to be 
empowered, where it has narrowed the scope of the investigation down to more clearly identified 
concerns, to issue requests for information by decision, setting time limits and periodic penalties, in 
the  same  way  as  under Articles  11(3)  and  15  of  EUMR  and Articles  18(3)  and  23  of  Regulation 
1/2003. The Commission should likewise be empowered to take statements and interview natural 
and legal persons to collect information, as under the EUMR and Regulation 1/2003. 

However,  one area of difference between the NCT and the EUMR  and  Regulation 1/2003 arises 
concerning the Commission’s more draconian “powers of inspection” (i.e. dawn raids). Under the 
EUMR and Regulation 1/2003, the Commission is entitled to conduct all necessary inspections of 
undertakings  premises  in  order  to  carry  out  its  duties  under  those  regulations.  These  powers  of 
inspection  are  limited  by  the  Courts  under  the  CFR,  the  principle  of  proportionality  and  the 
requirement  to  state  reasons. The  EU  Courts  have  recognised  that  the  Commission’s  powers  of 
inspection constitute “a clear interference with the right to respect for privacy, private premises and 
correspondence”.43 Indeed, in most national legal orders in the EU, such far-reaching interventions 
require prior authorisation from a court. To justify interference with this right and make it feasible to 
exercise  judicial  review  (Article  47  CFR),  the  Commission  must  provide  inter  alia  a  statement  of 
reasons for the inspection, including a description of the features of the suspected infringement.44 
Whereas the Commission may conduct inspections in the context of Sector Inquiries and has done 
so in the Pharma Sector Inquiry, there is some doubt as to when such inspections will be considered 
necessary and proportionate by the Courts.45 The Court outlined in National Panasonic that such 
inspections may conform with the principle of proportionality provided that the sole purpose of an 
inspection is to enable the Commission to gather information needed to assess whether the Treaty 
has been infringed.46 However, as NCT investigations would not entail any finding of a competition 
infringement,  nor  are  they  in  a  broader  sense  a  tool  for  the  Commission  to  investigate  potential 
infringements  of  the  Treaty  (as  Sector  Inquiries  have  been  typically  used),  there  are  serious 

43  Judgment  of  6  September  2013,  Deutsche  Bahn  v  Commission,  Joined  Cases  T  289/11,  T  290/11  and  T  521/11, 

EU:T:2013:404, para 65.    

44  Judgment of 8 March 2007, France Télécom v Commission, T 339/04, EU:T:2007:80, para. 59. 
45  See Helene Andersson, Dawn Raids Under Challenge: Due Process Aspects on the European Commission’s Dawn Raid 
Practices (Hart Publishing 2018), ch 9 (Dawn Raids in Sector Inquiries) 254-265, who argues that the Pharma Sector 
Inquiry  dawn  raids,  where  companies  were  selected  on  the  basis  of  size  rather  than  any  likely  involvement  in  an 
infringement,  could  have  been  considered  as  in  breach  of  Article  7  of  the  Charter  and  the  principle  of  proportionality 
(though the decisions were not appealed). She further argues that the Commission’s dawn raid powers in the context of 
a Sector Inquiry should be limited to where it has grounds to suspect competition infringements. 

46  Judgment of 26 June 1980, National Panasonic v Commission, C-136/79, EU:C:1980:169, para 30. 

35 

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
questions over whether similar inspection powers in the context of the NCT would ever be necessary 
or proportionate. Indeed, absent even a suggestion of wrongdoing, it may be difficult to justify the 
interference with fundamental rights. We do not, therefore, consider it to be necessary or appropriate 
to attach powers of inspection to NCT investigations.  

7.2 

Safeguards on investigative powers 

A more pertinent question is how to safeguard against improper use of investigatory powers in the 
application of the NCT. NCT investigations will generate significant costs, both administratively and 
for the market participants involved. For example, under the existing framework, the Commission 
may  undertake  a  sector  inquiry  in  order  to  gather  information  generally  about  a  market  which  it 
considers  may  not  be  working  well.  Specifically, Art  17  of  Regulation  1/2003  states  that  Sector 
Inquiries may be opened “where the trend of trade between Member States, the rigidity of prices or 
other  circumstances  suggest  that  competition  may  be  restricted  or  distorted  within  the  common 
market”. This is necessary to avoid arbitrary decisions, fishing expeditions and enable judicial review 
of the legality of the decisions.  

However,  NCT  investigations  are  also  likely  to  generate  significant  additional  costs  associated 
because  of  the  associated  remedial  powers.  The  possibility  of  remedies  will  cause  companies 
subject to incur significant cost and business disruption making their case as to why the remedies 
considered are unnecessary/disproportionate. Given these concerns, it may be advisable to split the 
NCT investigation into two phases. The first phase could focus on establishing the existence of a 
prima  facie  structural  competition  problem  (and  whether  an  NCT  investigation  is  the  appropriate 
response). This will also allow the Commission, where it concludes that the identified problems are 
not structural in nature and could be addressed under the existing framework, to conclude the NCT 
investigation  and  if  necessary,  launch  investigations  under Article  101  or Article  102  TFEU.  The 
second NCT phase would then be focused on determining which (if any) remedies are appropriate 
and  proportionate  to  the  identified  structural  competition  problem.  The  affected  parties  should, 
however, be able to offer voluntary commitments at the end of Phase I, to avoid lengthy Phase II 
investigations where simple solutions are available.  

The separation of two phases would be efficient as this structure would provide for an efficient screen 
to focus on those cases which merit detailed levels of information gathering, in-depth investigation 
and  rigour.  For  example,  the  first  phase  would  likely  have  a  much  broader  scope,  with  more 
participants actively involved, such that issuing detailed information requests to all businesses in the 
sector may be disproportionate. A two-stage process would not be new to the EU framework, as it 
exists under the EUMR, and it would also be similar to the UK market investigation regime where 
the “market study” has become a de facto Phase I, which – if the requisite legal test is satisfied – 
may result in a market investigation reference (‘Phase II’). 

A  clear  legal  test  for  the  opening  of  a  Phase  I  investigation  will  be  necessary  to  ensure  that  the 
Commission does not engage in “fishing expeditions”, launching lengthy NCT investigations without 
a  clearly  defined  theory  of  harm  or  potential  remedies  considered.  Moreover,  the  likelihood  of 
market-wide  remedies  associated  with  a  Phase  II  investigation  will  likely  push  the  affected 
undertakings to incur significant additional costs to ensure that the remedies adopted (if any) are 
appropriate. A separate and stricter legal test for the opening of a Phase II NCT investigation, similar 
to the “serious doubts” test for Phase II investigations under Article 6(1)(c) EUMR would therefore 
be  appropriate.  This  test  should  ensure  that  the  Commission  is  required  to  provide  sufficient 
explanation of the nature of the investigation, as well as the potential remedies being considered, 
so that affected undertakings can  properly make  their defence. This will also  help to ensure that 
there are feasible remedies in contemplation before incurring the cost of an in-depth investigation. 

36 

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.3 

Timing safeguard (Q34) 

A time-limit on the market investigation is necessary for two reasons. First, it supports the aims of 
the tool: a clear time limit is in keeping with the “early intervention” rationale of the NCT and should 
ensure that sight of this goal is not lost as the tool develops. Second, it contributes to the efficiency 
of  the  tool:  given  the  substantial  cost  and  frustration  associated  with  lengthy  investigations,  time 
limits guard against unnecessary costs and will help to ensure that NCT investigations are focussed 
and efficient from the start. 

Following the approach of the UK’s market investigation regime, for example, a time limit for each 
phase of the market investigations could be adopted. For example, at the end of a legally binding 
deadline for Phase I, the Commission could be required to decide whether to continue with an in-
depth NCT investigation (if the legal test is satisfied) or close the investigation (and potentially open 
antitrust cases if evidence of potential infringements has been found). Subsequently, a second-time 
limit could be applied for Phase II of the NCT investigation by which point the substantive findings 
must be made and any remedies determined. The definition of remedies must be included in the 
time limit, as remedies are the critical defining element of the NCT and there must be an impetus to 
consider and develop these from an early stage, as discussed above.  

The effectiveness of the time limit must, however, be protected. Firstly, the Commission should not 
be allowed to use other investigatory powers which are not subject to time limits as a de facto “pre-
NCT” phase. Secondly, the Commission should not be able to “restart the clock” by reopening a new 
investigation in the same market/issue following the closure of an NCT investigation. 

7.4 

Separation of powers (Q37 – Q38) 

Under  the  UK  market  investigation  regime,  there  is  no  overlap  of  personnel  between  those  who 
decide to refer a market investigation and those who conduct, and ultimately make decisions in, the 
market investigation. This ensures that the market investigation is run independently and looked at 
with a “fresh pair of eyes”. This model is reflective of the institutional history of competition in the UK 
and stems from the previous split between the OFT and the Competition Commission. The benefits 
of this approach have been summarised as follows: “As well as limiting confirmation bias, this two-
stage process is also valuable for avoiding the Market Investigation process becoming a depository 
for unpopular political issues that no one else wants to tackle.”47  

The  “fresh  pair  of  eyes”  approach  may,  however,  be  out  of  place  in  the  administrative  model  of 
antitrust in the EU. Questions 37 and 38 of the NCT consultation – which ask whether those affected 
by  an  investigation  should  have  the  possibility  to  comment  on  (a)  the  finding  of  a  structural 
competition problem and (b) the appropriateness and proportionality of envisaged remedies – hint 
at the alternative. Under the European model, the most effective form of procedural safeguard would 
be something similar to an oral hearing. This procedure has however faced criticism (including by 
the OECD) as the ultimate decision-makers are not required to attend, and perhaps for that reason, 
many defendants do not exercise their right to an oral hearing.48 The NCT presents the Commission, 
in the context of a new process, with the opportunity to strengthen this procedure or develop new 
safeguards, which could be road-tested for use in existing competition procedures.   

For example, in antitrust and merger control, the oral hearing comes at a relatively advanced stage. 
To increase its effectiveness, in an NCT investigation, the oral hearing procedure could be used at 
multiple stages. Logically, flowing from Questions 37 and 38, this would be before the decision to 

47  Amelia Fletcher, ‘Market Investigations for Digital Platforms: Panacea or Complement?’ Centre for Competition Policy of 
University of East Anglia (6 August 2020) available at <https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3668289> 
accessed 7 September 2020. 

48  OECD, European Commission – Peer Review of Competition Law and Policy (2005).  

37 

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
open an (in-depth) NCT investigation (i.e. on the finding of a structural competition problem) and, 
later, before the decision to impose remedies (i.e. on the appropriateness and proportionality of the 
envisaged remedies). Both of these decisions are likely to have significant cost implications for the 
affected  undertakings  and  should  therefore  be  subject  to  an  effective  procedural  safeguard. 
Moreover, it is logical that these hearing should be split, since the concern very different issues on 
which market participants are likely to have diverging views and interests.  

8 

Judicial oversight (Q39) 

The final safeguard, and perhaps one of the most important for the legitimacy of the NCT, relates to 
the rights of affected firms to challenge the Commission’s findings (and remedies) before the EU 
Courts. 

The investigative tools at the disposal of the EC according to the NCT require a judiciable legal test 
that  is  sufficiently  clear  and  does  not  afford  too  much  discretion  to  the  Commission  as  to  when 
intervention is permissible (consistent with Article 101 and 102 TFEU and the merger regulation). 
Absent  a  judiciable  legal  test,  the  EU  Courts  will  struggle  to  be  an  effective  check  on  the 
Commission’s power. This would be incompatible with the right to judicial review in Article 47 CFR. 

In this section we take this one step further, focussing on the standard of judicial review. In our view, 
clear and judiciable tests must be designed which allow the EU Courts to conduct the same intensity 
of judicial review as for antitrust and merger control decisions and do not afford the Commission too 
great  a  margin  of  discretion  over  complex  economic  matters.  Facilitating  a  full  and  substantial 
legality review would increase the legitimacy of the NCT as an apolitical, objective instrument for 
market regulation. 

As in other aspects, valuable lessons can be learned from the UK regime. The UK regime provides 
for  the  possibility  of  an  appeal  before  the  CAT.  The  appeal  procedure  extends  to:  (i)  the  CMA’s 
decision as to whether or not to refer a market for investigation, (ii) the CMA’s findings following a 
market investigation, or (iii) any remedies agreed or imposed following a market investigation. The 
CAT performs only a limited “judicial review” standard and does not conduct a full ‘merits review’ of 
the decision under appeal.49 This is in keeping with the standard of judicial review for merger control 
decisions but lower than the full merits review standard for antitrust cases in the UK. 

In our view, the breadth of a market investigation regime (both in terms of scope of and potential 
remedies) and discretion awarded to the regulator should be compatible with the standard of judicial 
oversight.  Indeed,  there  is  a  trade-off  between  the  discretion  afforded  to  the  authority  at  the 
administrative/enforcement  level  and  the  standard  of  judicial  oversight.  The  more  discretion  is 
awarded,  the  more  stringent  judicial  oversight  should  be.  Similarly,  the  broader  the  scope  and 
possibility of remedies being imposed, the more extensive the judicial oversight should be. 

In the UK, the lack of a merits review standard under the market investigation regime has set a high 
bar for applicants and in practice precludes all challenges on substance. Indeed, one of the most 
striking  features  of  the  challenges  over  the  last  decade  is,  first,  the  CMA’s  success  record  and, 
second,  the  lack  of  head-on  challenges  to  the  CMA’s  findings  (by  parties  subject  to  a  market 
investigation).50 The  judicial  review  standard,  in  short,  militates  against  substantive  challenges  – 
given the burden of demonstrating manifest error – and incentivises challenges to the CMA’s process 

49  Judicial  review  in  the  UK  is  limited  to  challenging  the  decision  on  four  established  grounds:  illegality,  irrationality, 

procedural irregularity and the principle of proportionality.  

50  Private  Healthcare  marked  the  sole  successful  substantive  challenge  to  an  adverse  market  investigation,  stemming 
however from a manifest factual error which forced the CMA to withdraw its final report before it was overturned by the 
CAT (while two challenges relating to other substantive issues were dismissed). 

38 

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
for decision-making. The consequence is that the market investigation regime in the UK is comprised 
of a triad of features which limit legal certainty: the breadth of the regime, the CMA’s discretion to 
determine  the  markets  to  investigate  and  limited  judicial  oversight. A  comparison  with  the  UK’s 
merger control regime exposes the lack of balance. While both regimes share the judicial review 
standard for challenges to the CMA’s decisions, the UK merger control regime has, in contrast, a 
precise scope and limited CMA discretion: first, there must be a precisely defined positive act – a 
notifiable transaction – and, second, the CMA may only investigate where the notifiable transaction 
satisfies the jurisdictional turnover or share of supply tests.51 

In  this  regard,  it  should  be  recalled  that  the  NCT  seems  to  be  premised  on  a  great  degree  of 
confidence  that  one  can,  for  example,  (i)  anticipate  what  markets  can  be  expected  to  tip;  (ii) 
determine the reasons for that tipping and whether it is, on balance, problematic; (iii) devise some 
sort of public  intervention  that  will prevent/correct tipping; (iv)  do this in  a  proportionate way that 
does not compromise welfare-enhancing elements or incentives. As such, the breadth of the NCT 
and the potential of (extensive) remedies being imposed warrant detailed and intense scrutiny by 
the EU Courts. 

The importance of intense judicial review not only stems from previous experience under the UK 
regime, but it is also supported by fundamental principles underlying EU law. This goes to the core 
of the rules purporting to establish checks and balances while attributing powers to the legislature, 
the administration and the judiciary. Indeed, the principle of effective judicial protection is enshrined 
in Article 6(1) of the ECHR, which corresponds to Article 47 of the Charter of Fundamental Rights of 
the European Union. Notably, Article 47 of the Charter does not distinguish between civil and criminal 
heads.  

In particular, legal certainty as a general principle of EU law warrants that the right balance is struck. 
Although  as  a  legal  principle,  it  may  be  ubiquitous  throughout  EU  case  law,  it  is  inextricably 
intertwined with the rule of law and fundamental rights.52 Effective judicial oversight is an important 
element of legal certainty. As Pablo Martin Rodriguez has put it: 

“[L]egal certainty answers to a logique politique in the sense that promotes and protects the 
full effectiveness of enacted rules and legal decisions, but also to a logique subjective in the 
form of setting limits and individual guarantees actionable against those rules and decisions. 
This dialectical character is consubstantial to the rule of law and should be embraced instead 
of rejected.” 

It should be noted that, while the General Court has unlimited jurisdiction on fines, the scope of its 
review of the legality of EU competition decisions is more limited, as it is not entitled to substitute 
the Commission’s judgment with its own. The intensity of this legality review nevertheless requires 
the General Court to scrutinise in meticulous detail the cogency of the Commission’s findings. This 
has been demonstrated on a number of occasions, most recently in CK Telecoms UK v Commission, 
where the General Court annulled the Commission’s decision to prohibit the merger between Three 
and O2 in the UK, where the Commission’s theories of harm were criticized as too vague to support 
its conclusions and failed to show a “strong probability” of a significant impediment.53 

51  Christian  Ahlborn,  ‘Market  Investigations  and  Market  Studies’  in  Angus  MacCulloch,  Barry  Rodger  and  Peter  Whelan 

(eds), The UK Competition Regime: A Twenty-Year Retrospective, (Oxford University Press 2020). 

52  Pablo Martin Rodriguez, ‘The principle of legal certainty and the limits to the applicability of EU law’ (2016) 52(1) Cahiers 

de droit européen 115. 

53  Judgment of 28 May 2020, CK Telecoms UK Investments Ltd v European Commission, T 399/16, EU:T:2020:217, para 

118. 

39 

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Indeed,  in  recent  years,  it  has  often  been  observed  that  the  EU  Courts  have  demonstrated  an 
increasing  willingness  to  deal  with  complex  economic  matters.54  More  specifically,  the  Court  of 
Justice has made clear in both merger55 and antitrust56 cases that, notwithstanding the margin of 
discretion  that  the  Commission  may  enjoy  with  regard  to  economic  matters  in  areas  involving 
complex assessments, the EU judicature must “not only establish whether the evidence put forward 
is  factually  accurate,  reliable  and  consistent,  but  must  also  determine  whether  that  evidence 
contains all the relevant data that must be taken into consideration in appraising a complex situation 
and whether it is capable of substantiating the conclusions drawn from it.”57 As the Court of Justice 
has repeatedly stressed in this regard, “the EU judicature must carry out its review of legality on the 
basis  of  the  evidence  adduced  by  the  applicant  in  support  of  the  pleas  in  law  put  forward  and  it 
cannot use the Commission’s margin of discretion as regards the assessment of that evidence as a 
basis for dispensing with the conduct of an in-depth review of the law and of the facts.”58 

The fact that the NCT does not provide for fines or infringements should not impact the intensity of 
the  judicial  oversight  of  the  General  Court,  and  the  legal  tests  must  not  be  designed  to  frustrate 
proper review as a result of that difference. Indeed, the intensity of the General Court’s review of the 
legality of Commission decisions does not notably vary between quasi-criminal antitrust decisions 
and  merger  decisions  (which  similar  to  the  NCT,  have  no  fines  or  infringements  attached).59 
Moreover, intense scrutiny of the NCT decisions would help rather than weaken its effectiveness as 
a  tool,  as  the  scrutiny  encourages  rigour  in  the  analytical  process  and  helps  to  sharpen  the 
Commission’s internal decision-making process. Finally, as the NCT would have no clear precedent 
to draw on, an active role for the Courts will be necessary to shape the boundaries of the tool, and 
in order to ensure the consistent application of EU law. 

9 

Legal base  

The Commission’s Impact Assessment states that the legal bases for the NCT would be Article 103 
TFEU in combination with Article 114 TFEU. In our view, however, it is doubtful whether Article 103 
TFEU constitutes an appropriate legal basis for the adoption of the NCT. Article 103 TFEU refers to 
legislation  “giving  effect  to  the  principles  set  out  in  Articles  101  and  102  TFEU”.  However,  a 
distinguishing feature of the NCT, particularly so in respect of the market structure-based Options 3 
and 4, is that this tool would be detached from the discrete treaty prohibitions set out in those articles. 

The Impact Assessment  itself recognises that the purpose of the NCT is to  address “gaps in the 
current EU competition rules” to address “structural competition problems”. Structural competition 
problems  are  defined,  in  the  Impact  Assessment,  as  “market  characteristics  that  have  adverse 
consequences  on  competition”.  By  contrast,  Articles  101  and  102  TFEU  address  competition 

54  Bernard van de Walle de Ghelcke, ‘Economic Reasoning before the European Union Courts in Competition Law’ (2018) 

Bruges European Economic Policy Briefings 44/2018. 

55  Judgment of 15 February 2005, Commission v Tetra Laval, C 12/03 P, EU:C:2005:87, para 39; Judgment of 28 May 2020, 

CK Telecoms UK Investments Ltd v European Commission, T 399/16, EU:T:2020:217, para 76. 
56  Judgment of 17 September 2007, Microsoft v Commission, T-201/04, EU:T:2007:289, paras 87-89.  
57  Judgement of 8 December 2011, Chalkor v Commission, C-386/10P, EU:C:2011:815, para 54; Judgment of 10 July 2014, 
Telefónica and Telefónica de España v Commission, C-295/12 P, EU:C:2014:2062, para 54; Judgment of 11 September 
2014, Cartes Bancaires v Commission, C-67/13 P, EU:C:2014:2204, para 46; Judgment of 8 September 2016, Lundbeck 
v Commission, T-472/13, EU:T:2016:449, para 113. 

58  Judgement of 8 December 2011, Chalkor v Commission, C-386/10P, EU:C:2011:815, para 62; Judgment of 10 July 2014, 
Telefónica and Telefónica de España v Commission, C-295/12 P, EU:C:2014:2062, para 56; Judgment of 11 September 
2014, Cartes Bancaires v Commission, C-67/13 P, EU:C:2014:2204, para 45.  

59  Some have even argued that, in light of judgments in Airtours, Tetra Laval, and Schneider Electric, that the EU Courts 
have been more prepared to comprehensively review the economic analysis in merger cases than in antitrust cases. See 
Ian Forrester, ‘A Bush in Need of Pruning: The Luxuriant Growth of Light Judicial Review’ (2009) European University 
Institute, Robert Schuman Centre for Advanced Studies, EU Competition Law and Policy Workshop/Proceedings, 28. 

40 

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
concerns  brought  about  by  the  conduct  of  undertakings,  i.e.  collusion  (Article  101  TFEU)  and 
abusive  unilateral  conduct  of  a  dominant  undertaking  (Article  102  TFEU).  Competition  concerns 
created by “market characteristics” that may distort competition in the internal market fall outside the 
scope of the existing treaty provisions. 

Moreover, it is equally important to take account of the fact that Articles 101 and 102 TFEU amount 
to statutory prohibitions: the treaty itself defines certain conduct as “incompatible with the internal 
market”. Indeed, the preparatory works show that the drafters of the treaty went to great pains in 
delineating the scope of these prohibitions.60 The NCT, however, would entail bestowing prescriptive 
powers  to  the  Union  institutions:  the  idea  is  to  empower  the  Commission  to  define  a  required 
standard of conduct without being bound by the treaty prohibitions. 

It is submitted that these limitations: (i) addressing competition concerns created by the conduct of 
undertakings (as opposed to structural competition concerns) and that (ii) statutory prohibitions (as 
opposed to a standard of conduct prescribed by the Commission), constitute basic principles of the 
EU competition law regime in Chapter 1 of Title VII of the TFEU. They no doubt reflect a conscious 
choice of the drafters of the treaty. 

Accordingly, to deviate from these principles and confer new, prescriptive powers to the Commission 
arguably does not fall within the purview of Article 103 TFEU. This provision is not intended to deal 
with  situations  in  which  the  drafters  of  the  treaty  did  not  afford  the  Commission  with  the  legal 
instruments necessary to meet the treaty’s objectives. 

As mentioned, the Impact Assessment does not refer to Article 103 TFEU alone, but to this provision 
in combination with Article 114 TFEU regarding the harmonisation of national rules: 

“Save where otherwise provided in the Treaties, the following provisions shall apply for the 
achievement of the objectives set out in Article 26. The European Parliament and the Council 
shall, acting in accordance with the ordinary legislative procedure and after consulting the 
Economic and Social Committee, adopt the measures for the approximation of the provisions 
laid down by law, regulation or administrative action in Member States which have as their 
object the establishment and functioning of the internal market.” 

Nevertheless, in our view, the applicability of Article 114 TFEU is equally debatable. It is true that 
this provision has been interpreted broadly and that it may, under certain circumstances, be invoked 
to confer powers to an EU sector-specific regulator to adopt binding, individual decisions addressed 
to an individual or natural or legal persons.61 However, the ECJ has clarified that Article 114 TFEU 
does not create “a general power to regulate the internal market” since this would be irreconcilable 
with the principle that “the powers of the Community are limited to those specifically conferred on 
it.”62 According to established case-law, legislation adopted based on Article 114 TFEU must, first, 
comprise  a  measure  for  the  approximation  of  the  provisions  laid  down  by  law,  regulation  or 
administrative action in the Member States and, second, has as its object the establishment and 
functioning of the internal market.63 Also, case-law clarifies that the applicability of Article 114 TFEU 
“falls to be assessed […] on the basis of objective factors such as main or predominant purpose of 
the measure and its content”. If the primary aim of the measure pertains to a different policy area 
and only incidentally falls under the internal market policy, this provision does not apply.64 

60  See e.g. Reiner Schulze and Thomas Hoeren (eds), Dokumente zum Europäischen Recht: Band 3: Kartellrecht (bis 1957) 

(Springer 2000). 

61  See Judgment of 22 January 2014, United Kingdom v Parliament and Council, C- 270/12, EU:C:2014:18. 
62  Judgment of 5 October 2000, Germany v Parliament and Council, C-376/98, EU:C:2000:544, para 83. 
63  See Judgment of 22 January 2014, United Kingdom v Parliament and Council, C- 270/12, EU:C:2014:18, para 100. 

64  Judgment of 22 October 2013, Commission v. Council, C- 137/12, EU:C:2013:675, paras 53 and 76. 

41 

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
However, the problem identified in the Impact Assessment is not divergent national rules, but the 
inadequacy of the powers conferred to the Union’s institutions under Articles 101 and 102 TFEU (i.e. 
the  “gap”  identified  in  the  Impact Assessment). This  is  very  different  from  e.g.  the  EU  Damages 
Directive65 (adopted on the basis of Articles 103 and 114 TFEU) which harmonised national rules of 
civil law. 

In our view, it is therefore highly doubtful whether the NCT can be classified as a “harmonisation 
measure”  in  the  meaning  of  ECJ  case-law. Adopting  the  NCT  arguably  has  little  to  do  with  the 
“approximation of the provisions laid down by law, regulation or administrative action in the Member 
States”  as  required  by  case-law.  Indeed,  “establishing  of  the  competition  rules  necessary  for  the 
functioning  of  the  internal  market”  is  an  exclusive  Union  competence  according  to Article  3(1)(b) 
TFEU, and it would be unlawful for the Member States to act. It is also assumed that the NCT would 
leave the current national competition laws unchanged.66 

As discussed, the treaty itself already contains carefully drafted competition law prohibitions (in fact, 
most Member States’ national competition regimes mimic the prohibitions set out in Articles 101 and 
102 TFEU). If the view is taken that the drafters of the treaty “got it wrong” and that Articles 101 and 
102 TFEU fall short of “ensuring fair and undistorted competition in the internal market”, it would be 
odd to characterise the conferral of additional powers to the Union’s institutions to fill such perceived 
“gaps” as a “harmonisation measure”. In this respect, it is important not to lose sight of the principle 
of conferral of powers enshrined in Article 7 TFEU. 

Filling such “gaps” is arguably beyond the scope of Articles 103 and 114 TFEU. Indeed, the treaty 
contains a specific provision to deal with similar situations: the so-called “flexibility clause” in Article 
352(1) TFEU: 

“If action by the Union should prove necessary, within the framework of the policies defined 
in the Treaties, to attain one of the objectives set out in the Treaties, and the Treaties have 
not provided the necessary powers, the Council, acting unanimously on a proposal from the 
Commission  and  after  obtaining  the  consent  of  the  European  Parliament,  shall  adopt  the 
appropriate measures.” 

The flexibility clause (then Article 235 EEC) was invoked, in combination with Article 103 TFEU (then 
Article 87 EEC), when the EC Merger Regulation was adopted in 1989.67 The equivalent provisions 
in the EC Treaty (Articles 308 and 83) were also invoked when the EC Merger Regulation was recast 
in 2004.68 Just like with the NCT, Articles 101 and 102 TFEU were, according to the recital to the 
1989 EC Merger Regulation, deemed “not sufficient to cover all operations which may prove to be 
incompatible with the system of undistorted competition envisaged in the Treaty”. This is strikingly 
similar to the reasoning set out in the Impact Assessment and one would therefore expect Article 
352 TFEU to be invoked as a legal basis also now. Indeed, to adopt the NCT would amount to a 
reform of the existing EU competition rules which is of similar significance as the introduction of the 
EC Merger Regulation in 1989. While the European Coal and Steel Community, which served as a 

65  Directive 2014/104/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 26 November 2014 on certain rules governing 
actions for damages under national law for infringements of the competition law provisions of the Member States and of 
the European Union [2014] OJ L349/1. 

66  See  Judgment  of  2  May  2006,  European  Parliament  v  Council,  C-436/03,  EU:C:2006:277,  para  44  (‘In  those 
circumstances, the contested regulation, which leaves unchanged the different national laws already in existence, cannot 
be regarded as aiming to approximate the laws of the Member States applicable to cooperative societies […].’). 

67  Council Regulation (EEC) No 4064/89 of 21 December 1989 on the control of concentrations between undertakings [1989] 

OJ L395/1. 

68  Council Regulation (EC) No 139/2004 of 20 January 2004 on the control of concentrations between undertakings (the EC 

Merger Regulation) [2004] OJ L24/1. 

42 

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
blueprint for the EEC Treaty, contained a merger control provision (Article 66), there is no precedent 
in Union law for an NCT-like instrument. It is an entirely novel type of legal tool. 

We see no valid legal argument for taking a different view today. The relevant treaty provisions have 
not changed since 1989 and 2004. Indeed, it would be difficult to ascertain any meaningful limit to 
Article 103 TFEU and to find any relevant role for Article 352 TFEU if such a major reform as the 
NCT  could  be  adopted  without  recurring  to  the  latter  article.  We  appreciate  that  the  fact  that  the 
Council has to vote unanimously under Article 103 makes the legislative process more challenging, 
but  a  broad  consensus  would  at  the  same  time  be  helpful:  it  would  solidify  the  legitimacy  of  the 
Commission’s  new  tool  from  the  outset,  as  was  the  case  with  the  merger  regulation,  and  avoid 
unnecessary legal challenges. 

Economists at Compass Lexecon (Miguel de la Mano, John Davies, Rameet Sangha, Guillaume 
Duquesne)  

Lawyers at Linklaters LLP (Christian Ahlborn, Fredrik Lowhagen, Helen Crossley, William Leslie, 
Lodewick Prompers, Eoin O’Reilly)  

September 2020 

43 

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
