Position Paper on the EU Commission’s proposals of a 
New Competition Tool and ex-ante regulation of gate-
keeper platforms under the Digital Services Act package - 
Elias Deutscher 

The  members  of  the  Centre  for  Competition  Policy  (CCP)  welcome  the  opportunity  to 
contribute to the European Commission’s consultations on the recent policy initiatives of a New 
Competition Tool (NCT) and of the ex-ante regulation of powerful online platforms under the 
Digital Services Act (DSA) package. This position paper accompanies the CCP’s response to 
both consultations.  

The major lines of the proposals of an NCT and an ex-ante regulatory regime under the DSA 
have been set out by the European Commission in two separate Inception Impact Assessments1. 
With the NCT, the European Commission proposes a new antitrust tool that – akin to the Market 
Investigation tool established in UK competition law by the Enterprise Act 2002 and updated 
by the Enterprise and Regulatory Reform Act 2013 – would allow the European Commission 
(or another regulatory authority) to impose remedies to address structural and conduct issues 
without necessarily finding an infringement of Article 101 and/or 102 TFEU. Along with the 
NCT, the Commission also envisages the creation of an ex-ante regulatory framework as part 
of the DSA package that would impose ex ante obligations  and prohibitions on large online 
platforms which benefit from significant network effects and act as gatekeepers.  

Assumptions 

Four basic assumptions seem to underlie the Commission proposals for the NCT and ex-ante 
regulation under the DSA. 

1.  Increased  levels  of  industry  concentration  and  profitability  in  digital  and  non-digital 

markets are symptomatic of a lack of competition.2 

2.  Increased  levels  of  concentration,  compounded  by  algorithmic  pricing  facilitate  tacit 

collusion.3 

3.  Large  vertically  integrated  platforms  that  benefit  from  large  economies  of  scale, 
network effects, data dependency and low levels of multi-homing act as gatekeepers of 
digital  ecosystems,  and  may  undermine  fair  trading  conditions  and  contestability  in 
digital markets. 4 

1 Inception Impact Assessment - New Competition Tool (‘NCT’). Document Ares(2020)2877634; Inception 
Impact Assessment: Digital Services Act package: Ex ante regulatory instrument for large online platforms with 
significant network effects acting as gate-keepers in the European Union’s internal market. Doumcent 
Ares(2020)2877647. 
2 Inception Impact Assessment - New Competition Tool (‘NCT’) (n 1) 1. 
3 ibid. 
4 Inception Impact Assessment - New Competition Tool (‘NCT’) (n 1) 1–2; Inception Impact Assessment: 
Digital Services Act package: Ex ante regulatory instrument for large online platforms with significant network 
effects acting as gate-keepers in the European Union’s internal market (n 1) 2. 

1 

 
 
 
 
4.  The existing  tools of competition  law enforcement  are insufficient  to  tackle both  the 
structural risks for competition and the structural lack of competition in these markets 
(in the most effective manner).5 

So far, neither of these four assumptions is substantiated by empirical or qualitative evidence 
in  the  Inception  Impact  Assessments.  Any  forthcoming  legislative  proposal  should  be 
accompanied by a comprehensive impact assessment that engages with various strands in the 
antitrust  and  recent  economic  literature  that  suggest  that  industrial  concentration  is  not 
necessarily a source of concern or a result of feeble competition.6 A number of recent studies 
point  to  explanations  other  than  market  power,  such  as  superior  productivity/efficiency7  or 
intensified international competition8, as sources of increased levels of concentration.  

A  comprehensive  impact  assessment  should  also  consider  long-standing  literature  that  casts 
doubt on the causal link between industry concentration and tacit collusion,9 initially postulated 
by the S-C-P paradigm of the Harvard School.10 In addition, the impact assessment should set 
out in clear terms under which circumstances pricing algorithms may facilitate tacit collusion 
that  cannot  be  addressed  by  Article  101  TFEU.  Such  discussion  should  account  for  the 
importance  of  communication  and  the  ‘human  factor’  in  ensuring  the  stability  of  (tacit) 
collusion.11 

As part of a comprehensive impact assessment, the Commission should also discuss when the 
presence of network effects, personal data, vertical integration or absence of multi-homing give 
rise to antitrust issues. This assessment should focus on the degree of contestability of markets 
as the relevant benchmark to distinguish between well-functioning and markets that may require 
regulatory intervention.  

Most importantly, any further policy proposal would have to put forward evidence in support 
of  the  assumption  that  the  existing  competition  law  toolkit  is  insufficient  to  resolve  the 
competition issues identified in the Inception Impact Assessments for both instruments. First, 
it remains unclear the extent to which the concepts of concerted practice under Art. 101 (1) 
TFEU  and  the  collective  dominance/coordinated  effects  doctrine  under  Art.  102  and  the 
Horizontal  Merger  Guidelines  are  insufficient  to  address  tacit  collusion  in  oligopolistic 
industries.12  

5 Inception Impact Assessment - New Competition Tool (‘NCT’) (n 1). 
6 R. H. Bork, The Antitrust Paradox: A Policy at War with itself [1978] (Maxwell Macmillan 1993) 164–196; R. 
A. Posner, Antitrust Law (University of Chicago Press 2001) 101–117. D. Autor and others, ‘The Fall of the 
Labor Share and the Rise of Superstar Firms’ (2019) forthcoming Quarterly Journal of Economics; G. J. Werden 
and L. M. Froeb, ‘Don't Panic: A Guide to Claims of Increasing Concentration’ (2018) 33(1) Antitrust. 
7 Autor and others (n 6). 
8 J. van Reenen, ‘Increasing Differences Between Firms:Market Power and the Macro-Economy’ (2018). CEP 
Discussion Paper No 1576 <https://cep.lse.ac.uk/pubs/download/dp1576.pdf> accessed 14 May 2020. 
9 R. A. Posner, ‘Oligopoly and the Antitrust Laws: A Suggested Approach’ (1968-1969) 21 Stanford Law 
Review 1562. 
10 D. F. Turner, ‘The Definition of Agreement under the Sherman Act: Conscious Parallelism and Refusals to 
Deal’ (1962) 75(4) Harvard Law Review 655; J. S. Bain, ‘Relation of Profit Rate to Industry Concentration: 
American Manufacturing, 1936-1940’ (1951) 65(3) The Quarterly Journal of Economics 292; J. S. Bain, 
Industrial Organization (John Wiley & Sons 1959). 
11 K.-U. Kühn, ‘Fighting Collusion by Regulating Communication between Firms’ (2001) 16(32) Economic 
Policy 167; D. J. Cooper and K.-U. Kühn, ‘Communication, Renegotiation and the Scope for Collusion’ (2014) 
6(2) American Economic Journal: Microeconomics 247. 
12 See for instance G. Monti, ‘The Scope of Collective Dominance under Articles 82 EC’ (2001) 38(1) Common 
Market Law Review 131. 

2 

 
 
 
Second,  under  Regulation  1/200313  the  Commission  already  disposes  with  Commitment 
Decisions (Art. 9) and Interim Measures (Art. 8) of versatile instruments that enable a swift 
antitrust  intervention  in  markets  without  the  need  to  engage  in  a  full  (often  lengthy) 
investigation of the theory of harm. The successful use of Article 9 Commitment decisions in 
high-tech markets,14 as well as the recent recourse to Article 8 Interim Measures in Broadcom15 
suggest that both instruments constitute effective tools to prevent market tipping or other forms 
of entrenchment of market power. The recent use of an Article 9 decision by the Commission 
to tackle signalling in the container shipping sector also suggests that commitment decisions 
constitute  an  effective  tool  to  address  tacit  collusion  in  oligopolistic  markets.16  Any 
comprehensive impact assessment would thus have to substantiate the need for new antitrust 
tools, in the form of the NCT and ex-ante regulation under the DSA. An increased use or reform 
of existing antitrust tools and other regulations might constitute a more effective and less costly 
solution to address the concerns identified in both Inception Impact Assessments. 

Goals 

The policy goals underpinning the proposal of the NCT and the proposed ex-ante regulation of 
platforms as part of the DSA remain obscure. Instead of referring to the protection of consumer 
welfare (which may include adverse effects on quality, choice or innovation), as overarching 
policy objective, the Inception Impact Assessments refer to a hotchpotch of various goals that 
both  instruments  are  supposed  to  protect.  The  goals  listed  in  both  Impact  Assessments 
encompass  market  contestability,  fairness,  competitive  opportunities  of  SMEs  and  small 
innovators,  a  socially  beneficial  distribution  of  the  gains  of  innovation  and  digitisation,  EU 
digital sovereignty and Covid-19 recovery.17  

Any legislative proposal should clearly state whether both instruments are still grounded in the 
consumer welfare standard as overarching policy objective, or rather pursue broader societal 
goals.  Also,  potential  conflicts  between  some  of  the  goals  listed  in  the  Inception  Impact 
Assessments  and  the  question  of  how  they  could  be  resolved  merit  more  consideration.  In 
particular, the Commission would have to clarify whether and how it intends to prevent that 
both  tools  transform  themselves  into  a  Robinson-Patman-like  regulation  that  protects  less 
efficient small players against fierce competition of large, but more efficient online platforms. 
In  the  absence  of  a  clear  definition  of  their  underpinning  policy  goal(s)  and  the  hierarchy 
between them, both instruments may lead to unintended policy outcomes. For instance, they 

13 Council Regulation (EC) No 1/2003 on the implementation of the rules on competition laid down in Articles 
81 and 82 of the Treaty. OJ [2003] L 1/1. 
14 See for a discussion of the use of commitment decisions in high-tech markets S. Makris, ‘Antitrust governance 
in an era of rapid change: Commitments-centred intervention in digital markets and the rule of law’ in B. 
Lundqvist and M. S. Gal (eds), Competition law for the digital economy (ASCOLA competition law series. 
Edward Elgar Publishing Limited 2019). 
15 European Commission, ‘Antitrust: Commission imposes interim measures on Broadcom in TV and modem 
chipset markets’  <https://ec.europa.eu/commission/presscorner/detail/en/IP_19_6109> accessed 10 January 
2020. 
16 Case AT.39850 Container Shipping. C(2016) 4215 final. See for a similar use of commiment decisions by the 
Dutch Competition Authority Dutch Cometition Authority (ACM), ‘Commitment decision regarding mobile 
operators’ (2014). 
17 Inception Impact Assessment: Digital Services Act package: Ex ante regulatory instrument for large online 
platforms with significant network effects acting as gate-keepers in the European Union’s internal market (n 1) 
2–3; Inception Impact Assessment - New Competition Tool (‘NCT’) (n 1) 2. 

3 

 
 
 
may promote greater  competitive  opportunities (aka. ‘fairness’) for small and medium-sized 
competitors, while stifling efficiency and innovation and, ultimately, leading to higher prices. 

The  sectorial,  personal  and  substantive  scope  of  the  NCT 

and DSA 

The design of the proposed NCT and the ex ante regulation under the DSA raises a number of 
questions about the scope of both policy instruments.  

First, the sectorial scope of both instruments would have to be defined. The Inception Impact 
Assessment for the NCT considers two options: (i) the application of the NCT to digital markets 
only, (ii) or its horizontal application across digital and non-digital markets alike. In light of the 
digitisation of an ever-growing number of industries and the difficulties of providing a succinct 
definition  of  digital  markets,18  a  horizontal  scope  of  the  NCT  appears  to  be  preferable. 
Moreover, some competition concerns identified in the Inception Impact Assessment, such as 
tacit  collusion,  network  effects  and  oligopolistic  market  structures  are  not  limited  to  digital 
markets. The horizontal application of the NCT across various sectors would also be in line 
with  the  regulatory  principle  of  technological  neutrality  which  is  crucial  in  ensuring  the 
applicability of the proposed instruments to new competition issues in fast-changing markets. 
The question of the sectoral scope should also be considered with respect to ex-ante regulation 
under the Digital Services Act. For instance, it remains unclear why self-preferencing by digital 
platforms  poses  more  competition  concerns  than  the  use  of  private  labels  or  category 
management agreements by large supermarkets. 

Second, the personal scope of the new competition tool and the ex ante regulation under the 
Digital Services Act would have to be defined: should the NCT and the ex-ante regulation under 
the DSA apply (i) only to dominant or also (ii) to non-dominant firms?  

If both instruments are to be applied to non-dominant firms, any future legislative proposal and 
impact  assessment  should  put  forward  a  clear  test  to  determine  the  personal  scope  of  both 
instruments. The ‘significant market power’19 (SMP) regime developed under the EU regime 
for electronic communications or the ‘strategic market status’20 (SMS) regime advocated by the 
Furman  report  may  constitute  potential  candidates  for  such  a  test.  Any  alternative  to  the 
‘dominance test’ would have to be anchored in a clearly defined set of criteria to determine 
when  specific  markets  are  not  sufficiently  contestable/controlled  by  firms  with  significant 
market power/strategic market status.  

18 E. Deutscher, ‘Is Furman right to propose ex ante platform regulation as the best way to address competition 
concerns in the digital economy?’ (2019) <https://competitionpolicy.wordpress.com/2019/04/24/is-furman-right-
to-propose-ex-ante-platform-regulation-as-the-best-way-to-address-competition-concerns-in-the-digital-
economy/> accessed 6 December 2019. 
19 Commission guidelines on market analysis and the assessment of significant market power under the 
Community regulatory framework for electronic communications networks and services. OJ [2002] C 165/6; 
Communication from the Commission — Guidelines on market analysis and the assessment of significant 
market power under the EU regulatory framework for electronic communications networks and services. OJ 
[2018] C 159/1. 
20 J. Furman and others, ‘Unlocking digital competition: Report of the Digital Competition Expert Panel’ (2019) 
81. 

4 

 
 
 
Relatedly, the sequencing of the SMP/SMS regime would have to be further clarified. There 
are two options: either (i) firms with SMP/SMS are identified on a case-by-case basis; or (ii) 
markets  which  fall  under  the  SMP/SMS  regime  are  identified  ex  ante  and  are  periodically 
reviewed  akin  to  the  SMP  regime  under  the  EU  regulatory  framework  for  electronic 
communications. The case-by-case approach may ensure greater flexibility and reduce type I 
and II errors. By contrast, the ex-ante approach has the virtue of ensuring legal certainty for 
firms. 

Third, the substantive scope of the NCT and the ex-ante regulation under the DSA has to be 
clarified. With respect to the NCT, the crucial question is whether regulatory intervention is 
triggered by (i) specific anti-competitive conduct, or whether (ii) the tool is also to be used to 
address purely structural issues without any conduct element.21 Even if the intervention under 
the  NCT  did  not  ensue  any  finding  of  an  infringement  of  competition  rules  and  fines,  the 
adoption of a non-fault regime (option ii) would constitute a considerable rupture with the long-
standing  principle  that  in  the  absence  of  abusive  conduct,  market  power  and  industry 
concentration as such do not constitute an antitrust violation.22 Any future proposal of a NCT 
should also clearly set out the market features/conduct elements that are considered a source of 
potential anticompetitive harm and would justify intervention and remedial action. 

The envisaged ex ante regulation under the DSA raises similar questions about the substantive 
scope of any ex-ante obligations and prohibitions in the form of per se-like rules. First, further 
clarification is necessary as to the type of conduct by gatekeeper platforms which should be 
required/prohibited  under  the  ex  ante  regulatory  framework.  Second,  it  would  have  to  be 
clarified whether these obligations/prohibition should apply horizontally across various digital 
sectors, or whether will they should be tailored to specific markets.23 This raises the question 
about the extent to which ex-ante obligations and prohibitions can be optimally calibrated to 
minimise type I or  II errors.24 A more detailed analysis  is  necessary to  identify the relevant 
market features and conduct elements that would require an ex ante obligation/prohibition of 
certain conduct. 

The Legal Test and Standard of Intervention 

The issues of sectoral, personal and substantive scope of the NCT and the ex-ante regulation 
under the DSA are closely intertwined with the question of the relevant standard of intervention. 
Any future proposal would have to define the relevant legal test and threshold of actual, likely 
or potential anticompetitive harm that would trigger the intervention under the NCT or ex-ante 
regulation under the DSA.  

21 For a similar proposal of an antitrust tool to address structural issues by the Harvard School C. Kaysen and D. 
F. Turner, Antitrust Policy: An Economic and Legal Analysis (Harvard University Press 1959) 46-49, 89-90, 98, 
111-112. 
22 United States v. U. S. Steel Corp. 251 U.S. 417 (1920) 451; United States v Grinnel Corp. 284 U.S. 563 (1966) 
570–571; Case 85/76 Hoffmann-La Roche v Commission ECLI:EU:C:1979:36 paras. 69-70. 
23 See option 3 (a) and (b) Inception Impact Assessment: Digital Services Act package: Ex ante regulatory 
instrument for large online platforms with significant network effects acting as gate-keepers in the European 
Union’s internal market (n 1) 3. 
24 A. Christiansen and W. Kerber, ‘Competition Policy with Optimally Differentiated Rules Instead of per se 
Rules vs. Rule of Reason’ (2006) 2(2) Journal of Competition Law and Economics 215. 

5 

 
 
 
For instance, remedial action with respect to specific conduct or structural issues under the UK 
Market Investigation must be based on the showing adverse effects on competition (AEC).25 
An AEC arises when ‘any feature, or combination of features, […] prevents, restricts or distorts 
competition’.26  This  means  that  intervention  can  be  in  theory  triggered  by  a  single  market 
feature (say, high entry barriers) or by the cumulative effect of several market features, each of 
which, when considered in isolation, does not necessarily give rise to competition concerns.  

In terms of standard of intervention, the UK Market Investigation Tool is used to address not 
only  adverse  effects  on  actual,  but  also  on  potential  competition.27  The  CMA  relies  on  a 
probabilistic, ‘balance of probabilities’ standard, to  determine whether the  adverse  effect on 
actual or potential competition is more likely than not.28 Under this threshold of intervention, 
the  CMA  carries  out  a  counterfactual  analysis  to  examine  whether  absent  intervention 
competition would be adversely affected. To this end, it compares the market features at issue 
with  the  rather  loosely  defined  standard  of  a  ‘well-functioning’  (not  perfectly  competitive) 
market, i.e. a market which does not display the market feature or combination of features that 
raise concerns.29  

In any further Impact Assessment or legislative proposal, the Commission should clarify the 
relevant  legal  test  under  the  NCT  and  the  DSA.  In  particular,  it  should  specify  whether 
intervention can be triggered by a single market feature, or whether a combination of structural 
or conduct elements has to be present. Also, the Commission would have to set out whether the 
cumulative effect of a number of market features that are in themselves innocuous would justify 
regulatory intervention. 

The Commission would also have to consider various possible standards of intervention/proof 
for intervention under the NCT and the DSA to determine the necessary degree of likelihood 
of anticompetitive effects that would warrant regulatory intervention. Various standards could 
be  envisaged:  either  (i)  a  ‘balance  of  probabilities’  standard  akin  to  that  of  the  UK  Market 
Investigation tool;30 or (ii) a stricter standard of proof recently endorsed by the General Court 
in CK Telecoms;31 or (iii) a looser standard of proof that does not only account for the likelihood 
of competitive harm but also its magnitude. Decision theory,32 as well as various recent expert 
reports  on  digital  competition33  counsel  for  a  departure  from  the  ‘balance  of  probabilities’ 
standard in cases where the anticompetitive effects are of a large order of magnitude, even if 
they are rather unlikely. Relatedly, the relevant benchmark of the counterfactual analysis under 
the  New  Competition  Tool  and  the  Digital  Services  Act  should  be  specified.  Recent  expert 
reports advocate a bolder counterfactual analysis that relies on rather strong assumptions about 

25 Guidelines for market investigations: Their role, procedures, assessment and remedies 2013. CC3 (Revised) 
para. 19. 
26 ibid para. 28. 
27 ibid para. 29. 
28 ibid para. 319. 
29 ibid paras. 30, 320. 
30 ibid para. 319. 
31 Case T-399/16 CK Telecoms UK Investments v Commission not yet published para. 118. 
32 C. F. Beckner, III and S. C. Salop, ‘Decision Theory and Antitrust Rules’ (1999) 67 Antitrust L.J. 41 61–62. 
33 Furman and others (n 20) 13, 99-100; J. Crémer, A.-Y. de Montjoye and H. Schweitzer, ‘Competition policy 
for the digital era’ (2019) 4, 11, 51, 116-124. See also in this respect Professor Bruce Lyons‘ response in E. 
Deutscher, B. Lyons and W. Lam, ‘CCP response to HM Treasury: Digital Competition Expert Panel - Open 
consultation’ (December 2018). 

6 

 
 
 
the functioning of the market absent the adverse features and, conversely, about the detrimental 
effects on competition absent regulatory intervention.34 

Remedies 

The  design  of  remedies  under  the  NCT  and  the  DSA  also  merits  further  consideration.  The 
Inception Impact Assessments for both instruments envisage a mix of behavioural and structural 
remedies. However, they do not go any further in setting out how the choice of a specific set of 
remedies should be made.  

In this respect, the Commission should first clarify the specific purpose of remedial action under 
both  instruments:  Should remedies only  be used to  offset  the identified  adverse effect(s) on 
competition? Or should they go beyond and be used to approximate the functioning of a specific 
market with a theoretical standard of a well-functioning market, for instance, by facilitating a 
greater  degree  of  competition  than  would  have  existed  even  in  the  absence  of  a  specific 
structural or conduct feature that raises antitrust concerns?  

Second,  any  future  policy  proposal  should  clarify  the  relationship  between  behavioural  or 
structural remedies: are structural remedies only available as a last resort if the anticompetitive 
harm cannot be effectively addressed by behavioural remedies (akin to Regulation 1/2003)?35 
Or are structural and behavioural remedies substitutes between which the competition authority 
can choose as it sees fit? This also raises the question of relevant procedural constraints, such 
as the principle of proportionality, a competition authority is subject to when imposing remedies 
under both acts.  

Third, the monitoring and duration of  remedies should  be clarified. This  question is  closely 
related to the institutional design of the New Competition Tool and Digital Services Act. The 
Commission would have to clarify whether the remedies are to be monitored by an independent 
regulator  (Commission;  or  new  authority)  or,  for  instance,  remedy  trustees.  Likewise,  the 
default duration of the remedies and the frequency of their periodic review would have to be 
clarified. The (cost of) monitoring and adequate duration of remedies may have an important 
impact on the choice between behavioural and structural remedies. 

Efficiencies and countervailing factors 

In  the  Inception  Impact  Assessments  for  the  NCT  and  the  DSA  there  is  little  mention  of 
efficiencies and other countervailing factors that would tip the scales against intervention. This 
absence of efficiency considerations is surprising, not least because even advocates of non-fault 
intervention in oligopolistic or monopolistic markets have recognised the need of an efficiency 
defence lest antitrust intervention entails greater costs than the harm it is supposed to remedy.36 

There are various channels through which efficiencies and other countervailing factors can be 
accounted for under the  NCT and any ex-ante regulation under the DSA. First, the personal 
(and  sectoral)  scope  of  both  instruments  may  operate  as  an  indirect  filter  for  efficiency 

34 Furman and others (n 20) 99–100. 
35 Council Regulation (EC) No 1/2003 on the implementation of the rules on competition laid down in Articles 
81 and 82 of the Treaty (n 13) Art. 7 (1) and recital 12. 
36 United States v. Alcoa 148 F.2d 416 (2d Cir. 1945) 430. Kaysen and Turner (n 21) 80. 

7 

 
 
 
considerations. For instance, both instruments could be based on a market share/concentration 
filter  akin  to  that  of  the  Vertical  Block  Exemption  Regulation  (VBER)37  or  the  Horizontal 
Merger Guidelines,38 that encodes the presumption that conduct of firms or market outcomes 
in markets falling below specific thresholds are most likely the result of efficiencies, rather than 
market power. Second, efficiencies can be factored in at the definitional stage of the adverse 
effect on competition. Here, the finding of considerable efficiencies or countervailing factors 
may undermine or prevent the finding of an adverse effect on competition. In particular, under 
the DSA, efficiency considerations could be encoded in the specific design of ex ante obligation 
and rules. Such optimally calibrated rules could take the form of a black-/grey-listed practices 
akin to the black- and grey-listed clauses under the VBER.39 Third, the New Competition Tool 
and the Digital Services Act could also provide for an explicit ‘efficiency defence’ allowing 
firms to proffer an objective justification to rebut the finding of adverse effects on competition 
(New Competition Tool) or the breach of ex-ante obligations/regulations (Digital Services Act). 
Fourth, efficiencies and other countervailing factors could also be accounted for at the remedies 
stage  by  requiring  the  showing  (and  periodic  review)  that  the  proposed  (and  implemented 
remedies) do not deprive firms of legitimate sources of efficiencies. 

The error-cost framework 

It is striking that the Inception Impact Assessment of the NCT and the ex-ante regulation under 
the DSA give only little consideration to the costs and benefits of regulatory intervention. Both 
Impact Assessments posit that the new possibilities of antitrust intervention to be created by 
both policy instruments will generate various benefits for society, consumers and in particular 
small-  and  medium-sized  competitors.  Absent  any  articulation  of  specific  theories  of  harm, 
these  benefits  remain,  however,  rather  diffuse.  At  the  same  time,  both  Inception  Impact 
Assessments consider behavioural and structural remedies as the sole source of regulatory costs 
for firms. They thereby obfuscate the costs arising from type I errors. Too bold intervention 
under the New Competition Tool or overly broadly construed ex-ante rules under the DSA may 
not only entail welfare losses by erroneously intervening in an efficient market or prohibiting 
welfare-enhancing conduct, but they may also deter other firms from competing aggressively 
or  making  welfare-enhancing  or  innovative  business  choices.40  Even  more,  the  mere 
introduction of an additional regulatory layer and the risk of falling within the scope of the new 
regulatory instruments may adversely affect firms’ incentives to compete aggressively and to 
innovate. In particular the adoption of a non-fault, structural regime under the NCT or ex-ante 
per se rules for certain conduct under the NSA may lead to a situation where firms will refrain 

37 Commission Regulation (EU) No 330/2010 of 20 April 2010 on the application of Article 101 (3) of the 
Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union to categories of vertical agreements and concerted practices 
[2010] OJ, L 102/1 2010. O.J. L 102/1, Art. 3. 
38 Guidelines on the assessment of horizontal mergers under the Council Regulation on the control of 
concentrations between undertakings. OJ [2004] C 31/5 paras. 17-20. 
39 Commission Regulation (EU) No 330/2010 of 20 April 2010 on the application of Article 101 (3) of the 
Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union to categories of vertical agreements and concerted practices 
[2010] OJ, L 102/1 Commission Regulation No 330/2010 of April 20, 2010 on the application of Article 101 (3) 
TFEU (n 37) Art. 4 and 5; Inception Impact Assessment: Digital Services Act package: Ex ante regulatory 
instrument for large online platforms with significant network effects acting as gate-keepers in the European 
Union’s internal market (n 1) 3. (option 3 a) 
40 F. H. Easterbrook, ‘The limits of Antitrust’ (1984) 63(1) Tex. L. Rev. 1. 

8 

 
 
 
from competing aggressively and growing their market shares lest to fall within the scope of 
the New Competition Tool or the ex-ante regime under the Digital Services Act.41  

The specific scope and design of both policy instruments will have a considerable impact on 
the balance between type  I and  II errors. Any further policy debate should consider various 
options as to how to strike an appropriate balance between both types of error costs. In line with 
recent expert reports, the Inception Impact Assessments for the NCT and the DSA represent a 
rupture  with  the  long-standing  view  that  innovative  industries,  characterised  by  dynamic 
competition  are  often  self-correcting  and  that  false  positives  are  particularly  costly  in  these 
markets.42 Such recalibration of the prevailing error-cost framework and its potential costs and 
benefits should be made explicit and analysed in a comprehensive impact assessment. 

41 Bork (n 6) 197; Posner (n 6) 116. 
42 J. B. Baker, ‘Taking the Error out of "Error Cost" Analysis: What's Wrong With Antitrust's Right’ (2015) 
80(1) Antiturst Law Journal 1 71–95; Stigler Committee on Digital Platforms, ‘Final Report’ (2019) 94–95 
<https://research.chicagobooth.edu/stigler/media/news/committee-on-digital-platforms-final-report> accessed 20 
September 2019; Crémer, Montjoye and Schweitzer (n 33) 51; Furman and others (n 20) 99–100. 

9 

 
 
  
 
 
 
