Ref. Ares(2020)4690745 - 08/09/2020
1 (2)

9/7/2020 

New Competition Tool  

Comments from the Technology Industries of Finland 

The Technology Industries of Finland (TIF) is an association for companies in the metals 
industry, the mechanical engineering and metal products industry, the electronics and 
electrotechnical industry, the information technology industry and consulting 
engineering.  Technology Industries of Finland has over 1,600 member companies. We 
promote competitiveness and the operational preconditions for the largest and most 
important export sector in Finland.  

General comments on competition  

To support the economic well-being in Europe, the legislation must nurture and protect 
effective and dynamic competition between the market players. It is important to ensure 
equal preconditions for companies to access markets and operate there without threat of 
other market actors abusing their market power and distorting competition. Fragmentation 
of  legislation  is  not  desirable,  instead  the  competition  rules  should  be  examined 
comprehensively. Otherwise, there is a risk of non-uniform and unjust enforcement and 
consequently inequal operating possibilities for companies.  

Concerning fragmentation, we would like to emphasize that there is at the moment several 
initiatives connected to competition law. Of these, Digital Service Act consultation with its 
ex ante rules is also referred to in the NCT consultation.  

Present situation 

The  EU  Treaty  articles  101  and  102  referred  to  in  the  consultation  questionnaire  have 
proven well-functioning and applicable in different markets. Introducing new rules without 
robust evidence of the need should be avoided. TIF considers that the structural problems 
brought forward in the consultation are solvable with the present rules. These rules can 
be  further  reinforced  and  particularised  e.g.  with  updated  guidelines.  It  is  of  utmost 
importance to secure the SMEs’ scope of operation against unfair competition. However, 
the suggested rules of the New Competition Tool might instead curb the healthy growth 
of European companies.  

Technology Industries of Finland 

Eteläranta 10, P.O.Box 10, FI-00131 Helsinki

Telephone +358 9 192 31

www.techind.fi

Business ID: 0215289-2

2 (2)

Legal security of companies 

All  options  presented  by  the  Commission  (re  Inception  Impact  Assessment)  will 
significantly  increase  the  powers  of  the  competition  authority.  It  is  necessary  to  define 
beforehand  clearly  and  openly  the  contents  and  limits  of  the  rights  and  powers  of  the 
Authority.  The  safeguards  for  the  companies,  who  would  be  targets  for  the  Authority’s 
measures, must be defined. In this respect, the Commission proposal is clearly lacking.  

The definition and criteria for the structural competition problems are vague.  The use of 
Authority  imposed  structural  remedies  without  evidence  of  competition  infringement  is 
highly questionable. From the company point of view, this procedure should include the 
possibility for appeal which again would slow down the process. If the Competition Tool is 
be taken into use, the structural remedies should be excluded as a sanction. 

In the Inception Impact Assessment, a new market structure test is mentioned as a basis 
for Tool application. The test, however, is not described in any detail. For companies, it 
would be essential to know beforehand the contents and criteria used in the test. 

Conclusions 

The Technology Industries of Finland finds the evidence for the need of a New Competition 
Tool inadequate. The present legislation works well, even though the processes might be 
time-consuming. The proper market investigation on the other hand gives the companies 
legal security. If needed, the present legislation can be updated and complemented with 
new guidelines.  

The impact and interaction of several competition-linked initiatives must be studied. The 
proposed New Competition Tool and its relationship with the DSA ex ante rules and the 
traditional  EU  Treaty  articles  101  and  102  should  be  clarified  as  to  their  possible  legal 
consequences and their interlinkages. 

If the New Competition Tool is implemented, the clear descriptions of market tests and 
powers  of  the  Competition  Authority  as  well  as  definitions  for  structural  competition 
problems  and  gatekeepers  should  be  made.  The  Tool  needs  to  be  foreseeable,  just, 
proportional and uniformly applied in the Single Market. 

----------- 

