The respondent provided its answers to questions raised in Section C and D based information supported 
by  evidence  or  legal  practice  regarding  the  Hungarian  market.  If  such  pieces  of  information  were  not 
available,  the  respondent  answered  “Not  applicable  /  no  relevant  experience  or  knowledge”,  this  paper 
includes the comments and remarks to some in-depth questions in Section C and D: 

AD 8.2. 

As  regards  the  Hungarian  market,  the  respondent  is  not  aware  of  any  particular  example  supported  by 
evidence or legal practice. 

Although the GVH has been proactive in the field of digital markets in the last couple of years, it has focused 
predominantly on the enforcement of consumer protection norms. Other major competition law enforcing 
jurisdictions  (such  as  the  EU  and  Germany)  have  heavily  relied  on  regulations  concerning  abuse  of 
dominance,  and  thus,  assessed  the  relevant  issues  of  digital  markets  even  in  the  context  of  B2B 
relationships. In contrast, the GVH's practice is quite sporadic in this regard, and it almost entirely lacks 
dominance cases of this kind. Nevertheless, its reliance on consumer protection norms allowed the GVH to 
tackle  similar  issues,  and  to  reflect  on  them  from  a  B2C  relationships  perspective.  Given  the  fact  that 
consumer  protection  procedures  are  significantly  shorter  because  they  do  not  require  a  robust  market 
analysis,  they  allowed  the  GVH  to  intervene  in  the  underlying  anticompetitive  practices  in  a  timely  and 
effective manner. However, although the GVH issued multiple guidelines and other soft-law instruments 
concerning digital markets, none of them addressed specifically the issue of market power. Consequently, 
there is somewhat of a vacuum regarding judicial interpretations of market power definitions in Hungary 
concerning digital markets, where there is no developed case law in this field yet, since abuse of dominance 
focused market analyses are largely absent.  

As  regards  market  power,  the  GVH's  practice and  case  law  in  merger  control  cases  and  a  recent  vertical 
restrictions  decision  can  also  be  considered  relevant.  These  decisions  suggest  that  the  GVH's  practice 
acknowledges that the access to data and the increasing potentials of online platforms may be considered as 
significant  factors  of  market  power  in  digital  markets,  and  thus,  in  future  cases,  competition  law 
enforcement should take into account these factors as well. 

Generally, the answer is affirmative, but the respondent represents the view that exact definitions of “digital 
markets” and “market power in the context of digital markets” are required to provide an accurate answer 
to the type of necessary intervention. 

AD 9.1. 

AD 9.3 

For traditional markets, competition law has developed measures of market power and criteria applicable 
to dominance and abuse of dominance. Up to now, assessment of market power has been based primarily 
on  market  shares.  Before  deciding  on  the  suitability  of  current  antitrust  tools,  the respondent  considers 
useful to analyse what kind of non-market-share-based measures can be applied to digital markets. 

The respondent has the view that, save in respect of the very specific structural competition problems linked 
to digital gatekeepers which we consider would be more appropriately and effectively addressed through the 
introduction of ex ante regulation through the DSA amendments, and pending the outcome of the Court 
appeals in the various digital platform cases pending adjudication, we believe that Articles 101 and 102 of 
the  EU  Treaty, if  updated  and  per  the  Commission’s  ongoing  consultations,  are  suitable  and  sufficiently 
effective to address structural competition problems across all markets, particularly when supplemented by 
greater  use  of  existing  competition  powers and  tools  available  to  the  Commission  (e.g.,  sector  inquiries, 
interim measures). 

AD 10.7  

The respondent notes that it is not quite clear to what extent anti-competitive monopolisation strategies fall 
under the scope of antitrust. Thus, in this regard the distinction between unfair B2C, B2B and P2B rules and 
antitrust rules are required to be laid down. 

AD 11.3. 

The respondent notes that unfair B2C, B2B and P2B rules are also to be assessed as existing regulatory tools, 
and  the  option  of  non-market-share-based  measures  of  market  power  (key  databases,  key  software 
environments, etc.) applied to digital markets may put the existing dominance-related rules in new light. 

AD 13.3. 

 
 
 
Following a deeper understanding of digital markets, the current framework of antitrust rules might be able 
to address the relevant new challenges. Thus, the respondent adopts the standpoint that the flexibility of the 
antitrust framework combined with a new approach, definitions and principles fitting the digital markets 
could fulfil its role also in the future. 

AD 14.4. 

As  regards  the  Hungarian  market,  the  respondent  is  not  aware  of  any  particular  example  supported  by 
evidence or legal practice. 

The  respondent  notes,  however,  that  for  retailers  which  are  present  both  online  and  offline,  pricing 
algorithms applied to webshops might have a secondary effect on offline prices. 

AD 15.1. 

As regards the Hungarian market, the respondent is not aware of particular example supported by evidence 
or legal practice. It needs, however, further consideration that pricing algorithms and similar analysis tools 
have generated efficiencies in many industries for a number of years, and an optimal intervention (via a new 
competition tool or otherwise) has to avoid any unnecessary restriction in the field of innovation. 

AD 15.3. 

Following a deeper understanding of digital markets, the current framework of antitrust rules might be able 
to address the relevant new challenges. Thus, the respondent adopts the standpoint that the flexibility of the 
antitrust framework combined with a new approach, definitions and principles fitting the digital markets 
could fulfil its role also in the future. 

AD 17.3.  

Following a deeper understanding of digital markets, the current framework of antitrust rules might be able 
to address the relevant new challenges. Thus, the respondent adopts the standpoint that the flexibility of the 
antitrust framework combined with a new approach, definitions and principles fitting the digital markets 
could fulfil its role also in the future. 

AD 18.8.  

As regards the Hungarian market, the respondent is not aware of any particular example supported by evidence 
or legal practice. The respondent agrees in principal that there might be a need to consider a targeted ex ante 
regulation to supplement ex post antitrust enforcement. Although there might be a range of criteria available 
that could apply in relation to determining the gatekeeper role of large online platform companies (but e.g. user 
numbers  seem  too  crude),  however  platforms  should  be  identified  via  a  more  dynamic,  case-by-case 
assessment.  The  following  criteria  could  apply  with  equal  force  in  relation  to  the  proposed  new  ex  ante 
regulatory  tool  to  address  online  digital  gatekeepers  and  we  consider  that  there  is  a  need  for  targeted 
intervention when a range of criteria are cumulatively satisfied: 

 
 
 

a non-contestable and concentrated market structure should be identified; 
the digital gatekeeper in question is an unavoidable trading partner; and 
the application of ex post competition rules would be ineffective in addressing the identified market 
failures arising from the exercise of the gatekeeping function. 

AD 19.1.  

As regards the Hungarian market, the respondent is not aware of any particular example supported by evidence 
or  legal  practice.  In  our  view,  it  is  not  obvious  that  the NCT  is  necessary  (and  in  any  case  it  should  not  be 
introduced before the effectiveness of any new ex ante regulation can be assessed).  

An  updated  competition  framework,  in  combination  with  targeted  intervention  in  relation  to  digital 
gatekeepers  could  allow  the  Commission  to  address  structural  competition  problems  mentioned  in  this 
consultation.  

Concerns have arisen about the ability of traditional competition rules to address issues in relation to digital 
platforms, in particular when defining digital markets and identifying dominance in relation to data funded, 
multi-  sided  markets.  In  addition,  competition  law  enforcement  is  often  too  time-consuming,  resulting  in 
irreversible foreclosure taking place before any, remedies are implemented effectively.  Remedies also tend to 
be specific to individual cases and difficult to apply more generally. We believe that the EU should take the lead 
in  addressing  the  regulatory  challenges  posed  by  digital  markets  and  that  competition  law  and  ex  ante 
regulation need to evolve together to address these challenges.   

In relation to competition law, when assessing market definition in relation to digital gatekeepers, there is a 
need to examine the commercial and strategic links between markets or market segments and the incentives 
available  to  digital  platforms  to  take  advantage  of  those  links  through  the  implementation  of  leveraging 

 
 
strategies.  These  leveraging  possibilities  open  up  the  possibility  of  a  broader  range  of  conglomerate 
relationships being affected than would otherwise be the case in more traditional markets. Our view is that a 
more dynamic analysis of the market definition issue is required, focusing on not just existing but on potential 
competition. The Commission should issue guidance that takes into account the particular dynamics of digital 
platforms and internet ecosystems. In addition, the Commission should make greater use of its powers to grant 
interim relief where necessary to prevent markets from “tipping”. 

Ex ante regulation might also be needed to fill the gaps that competition rules cannot address. Already existing 
ex ante regulation framework can provide a suitable reference point for the type of intervention required to 
address market failures, through the use of an adapted “three criteria” test designed for digital gatekeepers. 
The types of platforms, the types of competitive harms identified, and the remedies used to address those harms 
need to be varied and flexible to fit the particular issues that arise. These could vary from the prohibition of 
discrimination to access to key capabilities or data, to even structural separation where more extreme cases of 
competitive harm have been identified to occur in a systematic manner. In turn, one could foresee the adoption 
of a system of listed prohibited practices, accompanied by a flexible set of remedies.  

AD 19.3. 

Following a deeper understanding of digital markets, the current framework of antitrust rules might be able to 
address  the  relevant  new  challenges.  Thus,  the  respondent  adopts  the  standpoint  that  the  flexibility  of  the 
antitrust framework combined with a new approach, definitions and principles fitting the digital markets could 
fulfil its role also in the future. 

AD 20.1.  

The respondent adopts the standpoint that the definition of digital markets needs further elaboration, so that 
the above question can be answered, because the current definition is rather underdetermined to serve as a 
basis of sectoral differentiation. 

AD 24.1.  

Following a deeper understanding of digital markets, the current framework of antitrust rules might be able to 
address  the  relevant  new  challenges.  Thus,  the  respondent  adopts  the  standpoint  that  the  flexibility  of  the 
antitrust framework combined with a new approach, definitions and principles fitting the digital markets could 
fulfil its role also in the future. 

Our starting point is that consistent and significant evolution in EU competition law is best way to proceed. On 
the  proposal  for  a  competition  tool,  the  respondent  has  the  view  that  before  introducing  new  tools,  the 
Commission may assess the design and scope of the proposed ex ante regulation for digital gatekeepers, and 
that  the  existing  solutions  also  need  to  be  updated.  For  example,  the  market  definition  notice  needs  to  be 
adapted significantly in response to the challenges of the digitised economy and increase the use of existing 
powers in relation to interim measures and sector inquiries. 

AD 25.1.  

Based on the definition of digital markets it is not quite obvious (i) which markets belong to the scope of the 
new tool, (ii) whether the outlined concerns are primarily platform-related issues or there are extra elements 
and market phenomena.  

Thus, the following steps seem reasonable: firstly, the flexibility and reaction potential of the current antitrust 
framework have to be tested more deeply in the enforcement, and based on the practical experience, consistent 
core principles are to be laid down. At this point the respondent emphasises that the efficiency of collecting 
proofs and evidence in the digitalised economic environment might play a key role from the perspectives of 
enforcement and the success of the regulatory regime. Secondly, it has to be examined what is the useful scope 
of  platform-specific  regulation  and  what  developments are  taking  place  in  this  field.  Should  any  uncovered 
regulatory  issues  emerge  beyond  the  scope  of  antitrust  rules  and  the  platform  specific  framework,  the 
suitability of a new tool can be re-assessed. 

 
 
 
