1. 

1.1 

1.2 

1.3 

New Competition Tool 

08.09.2020 

Observations in the context of the Commission’s Public Consultation 

Introduction 

On 2 June 2020, the European Commission (Commission) launched a public 
consultation  on  a  proposed  New  Competition  Tool  (NCT).1  Freshfields 
Bruckhaus Deringer LLP (Freshfields) welcomes the opportunity to provide its 
observations  on  the  Commission’s  NCT  proposal,  further  to  the  comments 
submitted in response to the Inception Impact Assessment (IIA) published by 
the Commission. 

According to the IIA, the NCT is aimed at addressing purported ‘gaps in the 
current EU competition rules and allowing for timely and effective intervention 
against  structural  competition  problems  across  markets.’2  The 
IIA 
distinguishes  between  two  forms  of  ‘structural  competition  problems’ 
depending  on  whether  harm  is  about  to  affect  or  has  already  affected  the 
market:3 

(a) 

(b) 

Structural  risks  for  competition.  Scenarios  where  certain  market 
characteristics (e.g. network and lock-in effects) and the conduct of the 
companies  operating  in  the  markets  concerned  create  a  threat  for 
competition (e.g. markets perceived as prone to ‘tipping’); and 

Structural lack of competition. Scenarios where a market is not working 
well and not delivering outcomes due to its structure (e.g. oligopolistic 
market structure with an increased risk of tacit collusion). 

Although  the  Commission’s  NCT  proposal  was  announced  along  with  the 
Commission’s Digital Services Act (DSA) package, its scope does not appear 
to  be  limited  to  digital  and/or  digitally  enabled  markets.  The  NCT  proposal 
envisages  a  significant  expansion  of  the  Commission’s  existing  powers, 
potentially including the power to impose extensive behavioural and structural 
remedies  absent  an  infringement  decision.  The  NCT  will  empower  the 
Commission to change the structure of a market even where the players active 
on  that  market  behave  in  full  compliance  with  the  legal  requirements  of 
Articles 101  and  102  TFEU  as  well  as  with  merger  control  rules.  The 
introduction of the NCT is therefore bound to have far-reaching implications – 
going far beyond those of established investigation and sector inquiry tools – 
and is likely to result in a paradigm shift in EU competition law enforcement. 

1.4 

Against this background, our observations in this submission are focused on a 
number of key questions and open issues that we would urge the Commission 
to consider carefully in deciding whether to proceed with, and if so, designing 

1   Commission,  Proposal  for  a  Regulation:  Single  Market  –  new  complementary  tool  to  strengthen 
competition  enforcement,  2  June  2020,  https://ec.europa.eu/info/law/better-regulation/have-your-
say/initiatives/12416-New-competition-tool.  

2   Commission, NCT IIA, 4 June 2020, Section A. 

3   Ibid. 

 
 
                                                 
the NCT, should it  decide  to  go  ahead  with its  proposal. As  the consultation 
questionnaire published by the Commission (Questionnaire) is largely focused 
on  obtaining  factual  observations  about  industry  characteristics,  we  consider 
that  it  is  more  appropriately  answered  by  companies  which  operate  on  those 
markets.  Our  observations  in this  submission therefore  address  the  following 
more fundamental issues with respect to the NCT proposal:  

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

(d) 

(e) 

(f) 

General  observations  on  the  need  for  an  NCT  as  proposed  by  the 
Commission (Section 2); 

The  NCT’s  legal  basis  under  the  Treaty  of  the  Functioning  of  the 
European Union (TFEU) (Section 3); 

The NCT’s relationship with Articles 101 and 102 TFEU and the DSA 
package (Section 4); 

The need for a clear legal test (Section 5); 

The applicable threshold for the imposition of remedies (Section 6); 

Procedural  considerations  and  the  establishment  of  a  fair  process  that 
safeguards companies’ rights of defence and rights of appeal (Section 
7); and 

(g) 

Conclusion (Section 8). 

Given that there are still many uncertainties around the shape of the future NCT, 
we would welcome the opportunity to contribute to a further public consultation 
once the contours of any new NCT instrument are more developed. 

General  observations  on  the  need  for  an  NCT  as  proposed  by  the 
Commission 

In  assessing  and  designing  the  NCT,  it  is  imperative  that  the  Commission 
considers and clearly delineates the scope of the NCT and its relationship with 
existing competition rules. It is crucial that the Commission clearly defines in 
concrete terms the scope of the issues the NCT is seeking to address and any 
alleged enforcement gap to prevent this tool from jeopardising the credibility 
and quality of the current globally respected competition infrastructure within 
the EU. 

(a) The alleged Enforcement Gap 

There is a powerful argument to be made that Articles 101 and 102 TFEU (and 
their  predecessors)  have  stood  the  test  of  time,  operating  effectively  as  the 
cornerstones of EU competition law and policy for more than 50 years, and have 
proven  to  be  sufficiently  broad  and  malleable  to  address  a  host  of  evolving 
economic  trends  and  technological  developments  over  that  time.  Indeed,  the 
existing legal structure has been adaptable and able to address novel issues, in 
particular in the technology space. For example, the application of the ‘tying’ 
doctrine in cases involving Microsoft and Google/Android,4 the development of 

1.5 

2. 

2.1 

2.2 

4   Commission, Cases AT.40099 and AT.39530. 

216 

 
                                                 
self-preferencing/leveraging  theories  of  harm  in  Google  Shopping5  and 
innovation  theories  of  harm  in  merger  control6  –  these  are  all  instances  that 
would suggest that there is no enforcement gap. 

2.3  We recall the statement of Executive Vice President Vestager which underlined 
the sufficiency of existing enforcement tools in a recent speech, noting: ‘[…] 
that’s not to say that we need fundamental changes to the rules themselves. […] 
The fundamental  motives,  like greed and fear,  that tempt companies  to harm 
competition are the same as they’ve ever been – and the competition rules are 
still well designed to deal with them’.7  

2.4 

2.5 

The  Commission  should  therefore  exercise  considerable  caution  in  deciding 
whether the NCT is actually needed and, if it is, carefully consider and identify 
any  potential  ‘gap  cases’  in  clearly  defined  circumstances  that  cannot  be 
addressed by existing rules. In this context we also note that the 2019 report by 
the Special Advisers to DG COMP calls for the application of existing tools of 
EU competition law enforcement to be refined and adapted to the challenges of 
the digital age but does not advocate for something of the calibre of the NCT.8 

‘Tipping markets’ and unilateral strategies by non-dominant companies to grow 
their market position 

The idea that  certain markets  are prone to  ‘tipping’, where  the  ‘winner takes 
most’, stands out as a particularly speculative basis for the introduction of new 
legislation. While this ‘phenomenon’ has been discussed, among others, in the 
Furman Report9 and the Special Advisers’ Report, we question whether market 
‘tipping’  –  and  the  extent  to  which  it  does  in  fact  take  place  –  has  been 
sufficiently  analysed  to  legitimise  the  Commission’s  far-reaching  and  highly 
intrusive  NCT  proposal.  Indeed,  there  is  hardly  any  enforcement  practice 
relating  to  ‘tipping’,  let  alone  case  law  from  the  Court  of  Justice  of  the  EU 
(CJEU).  

2.6 

It  is  also  said  that  in  digital  markets  ‘extreme  returns  to  scale’  favour  the 
incumbent. Yet, strong scale effects as a result of high fixed and low marginal 
costs are equally prevalent in the (old) utility and infrastructure industries. The 
previous qualification of such industries as natural monopolies has been largely 
abandoned and a combined application of Articles 101 and/or 102 TFEU with 

5  Commission, Case AT.39740. 

6   Commission, Case M.8084. 

7   Executive  Vice  President  Vestager  speech,  Defining  markets  in  a  new  age,  9  December  2019, 

https://ec.europa.eu/commission/commissioners/2019-2024/vestager/announcements/defining-
markets-new-age_en. 

8   Jacques  Crémer,  Yves-Alexandre  de  Montjoye  and  Heike Schweitzer, Competition  policy  for 
Report), 4 April 2019, 

the digital era 
https://ec.europa.eu/competition/publications/reports/kd0419345enn.pdf. 

Advisers’ 

(Special 

9   Jason Furman, Diane Coyle, Amelia  Fletcher, Derek McAuley, Philip Marsden, Unlocking digital 
2019, 

competition:  Report 
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/7
85547/unlocking_digital_competition_furman_review_web.pdf.  

the  Digital  Competition  Expert  Panel,  March 

of 

316 

 
                                                 
2.7 

2.8 

2.9 

sector-specific regulation has yielded significant progress in terms of enabling 
new market entrants and appropriately controlling market behaviour. 

Even if it were possible to predict when a market is prone to ‘tipping’, it remains 
unclear what intervention an NCT would achieve. Absent the use of intrusive 
remedies (such as ‘market share caps’) to maintain a particular market structure 
(which  would  be  rather  draconian  and  have  unknown  and  likely  negative 
consequences),  any  intervention  would  risk  a  regulator  simply  picking  the 
‘winners’ and ‘losers’ in a market in an arbitrary fashion. 

Similarly, the IIA and the Questionnaire identify ‘unilateral strategies by non-
dominant companies to monopolise a market’ as a type of conduct that could be 
tackled  by  the  NCT.  Again,  this  seems  rather  speculative  and  there  is  no 
evidence (or examples) provided of what this type of conduct would entail or 
why  it  is  considered  unambiguously  detrimental.  Indeed,  such  ‘unilateral 
strategies’  seem  to  be  another  way  of  describing  companies  seeking  to  grow 
their market position; it is unclear why this is conduct that would merit intrusive 
intervention via the NCT. 

Although Article 102 TFEU, in contrast to Section 2 of the Sherman Act 1890,  
does  not  cover  attempts  to  dominate/monopolise  a  market,  its  scope  is  in 
practice  just  as  broad  (if  not  broader)  given  that  dominance  can  be  (and  has 
previously been) found by the Commission at market shares lower than 40%.10 
Moreover, Article 102 TFEU has proven particularly versatile and flexible in 
being able to deal with attempts by dominant companies to abusively exercise 
their market power in vertically-related or adjacent markets (see for example 
Tetra Pak II11). Recent infringement decisions (such as Google Shopping) and 
ongoing  investigations  by  the  Commission  (such  as  the  investigation  into 
Amazon Marketplace) illustrate that Article 102 TFEU is already an effective 
tool available to the Commission to tackle a wide range of practices relevant to 
perceived ‘tipping’ concerns. 

2.10  Moreover, premature or untargeted intervention risks causing substantial harm 
to  competition  and  innovation.  The  types  of  conduct  mentioned  by  the 
Commission appear indistinguishable from successful organic growth as a result 
of innovation and competition on the merits. Given the importance of scale and 
network  effects  in  some  of  the  markets  targeted  by  the  NCT,  seeking  to 
intervene in a speculative and unpredictable fashion risks stifling competition 
between  companies  (including  European  firms)  in  evolving  and  innovative 
markets. Absent further experience, placing ‘structural risks for competition’ at 
the centre of the NCT’s aims is unjustified. 

2.11  The harm to competition and innovation that would be  caused by the  heavy-
handed  use  of  an  NCT  cannot  be  downplayed,  bearing  in  mind  the  strong 
empirical  evidence  that  digitalisation  and  innovation  in  digital  markets  have 
benefited consumers, businesses and the wider economy. A recent BCG report 

10   Monopolisation cases under Section 2 of the Sherman Act generally require evidence of market shares 
exceeding 70%. Even for attempted monopolisation cases, market shares exceeding 50% are typically 
required.  

11   CJEU, Case C-333/94 P. 

416 

 
                                                 
on the most innovative companies in 2020 demonstrates how online platforms 
and other tech / digital players continue to display high levels of innovation. In 
the 14 years since it began to produce its Most Innovative Companies report, 
only eight companies have made the list every year and seven of these are tech 
companies. Similarly, a recent report by PwC found that ‘digitization clearly 
has  a  positive  impact  on  economic  advancement,  societal  well-being,  and 
government  effectiveness.’12  Digitisation  has  brought  enormous  benefits  to 
consumers across a continuously expanding field of products and services. A 
new generation of companies seeking to take advantage of digitisation have also 
been created in the B2B space, from Stripe (payments processing) and Shopify 
(ecommerce  solutions)  to  Xero  (accounting)  and  Flexport  (digital  freight 
forwarding),  enabling  business  to  be  conducted  more  effectively  across  the 
global  economy.  Digitalisation of the broader economy is  key –  in 2018, the 
McKinsey Global Institute found that US$13 trillion could be added to global 
GDP by 2030 through digitisation, automation and artificial intelligence.13 

Oligopolistic markets 

2.12  The IIA and Questionnaire refer to oligopolistic markets as being a target of the 

NCT where there are structural market failures.  

2.13  The  debate  about  the  ability  of  Articles  101  and  102  TFEU  to  address  tacit 
collision is long running, yet there is limited evidence that an NCT would be 
effective in dealing with alleged competition concerns in oligopolistic markets. 
Indeed, the UK Competition and Markets Authority (the CMA) has had limited 
success when using its market investigation regime to investigate oligopolistic 
markets. For example, there appears to be little robust evidence that its recent 
market  investigations  in  the  retail  banking  and  energy  markets  resulted  in 
material changes to their respective market structures that were not occurring 
already  as  a  result  of  developing  market  conditions  or  the  decisions  of  other 
regulators. 

2.14  Competition  agencies  have  been  able 

tools  such  as 
Article 101 TFEU and  similar provisions to  deal  effectively and  innovatively 
with collusion problems. This is particularly the case in digital markets, as is 
illustrated by the Eturas case14 and the CMA’s infringement decision against 
online sellers of posters and frames.15  

to  use  other 

2.15  We  question  how  the  Commission  has  come  to  identify  an  enforcement  gap 
which cannot be remedied under the existing rules. Indeed, there is no lack of 
widespread and forceful enforcement activity against digital or digitally enabled 
companies and issues such as self-preferencing are at the heart of some of the 
recently concluded and ongoing investigations by the Commission. As many of 
these investigations are either not yet concluded by the Commission or now sub 
iudice before the EU Courts in Luxembourg, there is a fundamental question 

12   See https://www.strategyand.pwc.com/m1/en/reports/maximizing-the-impact-of-digitization.pdf. 

13   See https://www.itu.int/dms_pub/itu-s/opb/gen/S-GEN-ISSUEPAPER-2018-1-PDF-E.pdf. 

14   CJEU, Case C-74/14. 

15   CMA, Case 50233, https://www.gov.uk/cma-cases/online-sales-of-discretionary-consumer-products. 

516 

 
                                                 
about  the  appropriateness  of  introducing  a  new  tool  which  would  allow  the 
enforcing agency to intervene in companies’ market conduct and impose far-
reaching remedies without having to establish to the required legal standard the 
illegality of the companies’ conduct or any clear detriment to consumers or the 
competitive process.  

(b) The types  of conduct set out in the IIA and Questionnaire do  not seem 
suitable for an NCT 

2.16  The  IIA  and  Questionnaire  refer  to  different  types  of  structural  risks  for 
competition.  However, there  is a  lack of evidence that  any of these risks  are 
actually  present  and,  even  if  they  are,  whether  the  benefits  of  intervening 
through the NCT would outweigh the harm to competition and innovation or 
other unintended consequences from such intervention. 

2.17  The  IIA  explains  that  the  NCT  is  aimed  at  tackling  ‘structural  competition 
problems’ that Articles 101 and 102 TFEU ‘cannot tackle (e.g. monopolisation 
strategies by non-dominant companies with market power) or cannot address 
in  the  most  effective  manner  (e.g.  parallel  leveraging strategies  by dominant 
companies into multiple adjacent markets).’16 

2.18  To justify the introduction of the NCT, the Commission needs to identify clearly 
how any ‘structural competition problems’ that constitute so-called ‘gap cases’ 
arise and why they cannot be effectively addressed under Articles 101 and/or 
102 TFEU. In this regard, as noted by the Commission in the IIA, there is an 
ongoing debate and no clear consensus as to whether there any enforcement gap 
exists.17  

(c) Timely intervention 

2.19 

If the goal is to enable the Commission to act swiftly, the NCT is unlikely to be 
an effective solution. It takes time to adopt new legislation at the EU level and 
there will likely be legal challenges throughout the process. There is now rich 
jurisprudence  in  the  case  law  of  the  European  Courts  on  the  application  of 
Articles 101 and 102 TFEU which provides the Commission with a solid legal 
basis to develop its enforcement priorities with legal certainty. By contrast, even 
following  the  enactment  of  any  new  law,  its  scope  and  application  can  be 
expected to be rigorously tested in the courts since there will be no similar body 
of case law or decisional practice against which any decisions under the NCT 
can be assessed. This can be expected to increase rather than speed up, the time 
taken for investigations and any remedies to be implemented. Furthermore, as 
described below, the UK markets regime shows that market investigations are 
time-consuming,  resource-intensive  and  take  a  long  period  to  achieve  their 
intended outcome (if achieved at all). This is in stark contrast with the power to 
impose interim measures already available to the Commission when carrying 

16   Commission, Single Market Performance Report 2019, 17 December 2019, document: SWD (2019), 

444, final. 

17   Ibid. 

616 

 
                                                 
out enforcement action under Articles 101 and 102 TFEU (as deployed in the 
Broadcom case).18 

2.20 

It therefore seems unlikely that the NCT would, in practice, provide a route for 
enabling  ‘timely  and  effective  intervention  against  structural  competition 
problems across markets.’19  

(d) Experience from the CMA markets regime 

2.21  The  UK  has  long  had  a  markets  regime.  Market  investigations  are  detailed 
examinations into whether particular features of a market give rise to an adverse 
effect  on  competition  and,  if  so,  what  remedial  action  may  be  appropriate. 
Similar to the proposed NCT, the markets regime sits separately to the CMA’s 
competition enforcement powers and enables the CMA to investigate a market 
without needing to find that a firm (or group of firms) has infringed competition 
law. 

2.22  The CMA (and its predecessor the Competition Commission) has carried out 
market investigations in relation to a wide range of sectors, including groceries, 
retail  banking,  energy,  investment  consultancy  and  fiduciary  management 
services,  statutory  audit  services, private motor insurance, private  healthcare, 
and movies on pay TV. 

2.23  However, the CMA’s markets regime is largely untested in the key areas where 

the NCT’s use is envisaged by the Commission. In particular: 

(a)  With  regard  to  digital  markets,  with  which  the  NCT  is  particularly 
concerned, the CMA has recently conducted initial market studies into: 
(i) online platforms and digital advertising; and (ii) digital comparison 
tools. However, in both cases, the CMA decided not to open a market 
investigation.  Instead  the  outcomes  of  these  market  studies  were 
primarily a series of recommendations to the UK Government and other 
sector regulators in the UK which the CMA considered would be more 
effective than acting itself under the market investigation regime. 

(b)  While the CMA has previously utilised market investigations to attempt 
to  tackle  some  of  the  issues  set  out  in  the  Questionnaire  around  a 
‘structural  lack  of  competition’  (e.g.  markets  displaying  certain 
structural features, such as high concentration and entry barriers), it has 
not been used in any meaningful capacity to address so-called ‘structural 
risks  for  competition’  as  described  in  the  IIA.  Therefore,  the 
Commission should exercise caution in using the UK’s markets regime 
as  a  basis  for  justifying  the  use  of  the  NCT  to  address  so-called 
‘structural risks for competition’. 

2.24  Further, the impact  of remedies  flowing from  market  investigations  has  been 
mixed. For example, the CMA’s two-year long investigation into the UK energy 

18   See https://ec.europa.eu/commission/presscorner/detail/en/IP_19_6109.  

19   Commission, NCT IIA, 4 June 2020, Section A. 

716 

 
                                                 
market20  has  been  criticised  by  commentators  for  failing  to  bring  significant 
change to the UK energy industry. Remedies imposed in the banking industry 
have  been  time-consuming  and  extremely  onerous  for  industry  participants. 
Indeed,  the  costs  imposed  on  the  industry  likely  outweigh  the  financial 
implications  of  fining  decisions  taken  by  the  CMA  to  date  under  existing 
competition law. Likewise, the effectiveness, timeliness and appropriateness of 
the CMA’s recent actions in its investigation of statutory audit services is widely 
debated  in the UK. What is  beyond doubt  is  that each  of these inquiries  was 
onerous  and  resource  intensive  for  the  CMA  and  the  industries  involved.  A 
further  limitation  of  using  market  investigations  as  the  legal  basis  for  a  pro-
competition  approach  is  that  its  remedies  are  largely  static.  Binding  orders 
cannot be revised and updated as the nature of fast-developing markets and/or 
potential solutions evolve.21 

2.25  More generally, there are good reasons to doubt the effectiveness of structural 
remedies imposed by an agency or court in improving performance in a market. 
Concerns may exist as to whether such remedies can be timely (given the length 
of time required for any investigation or proceeding to conclude and the market 
changes that may occur during that period) or adequate due the complexity and 
difficulty of crafting appropriate remedies (at least outside the merger context). 
Such remedies are, in any event, available to the Commission under Regulation 
1/2003,  both  when  adopting  an  infringement  decision  or  a  commitments 
decision. 

2.26  The experience from the UK markets regime is that a meaningful fact-finding 
inquiry takes close to three years before the CMA is in a position to order the 
types  of  remedies  being  envisaged  with  the  NCT.  For  example,  the  CMA 
commenced its market study work into retail banking in June 2013, and it took 
over three years before the CMA published its final report for its retail banking 
market investigation in August 2016 (with the remedies still in the process of 
being fully implemented to this day).22 This timeline indicates that significant 
time is required to conduct a proper fact-finding inquiry. While the CMA has 
recently  sought  to  streamline  the  process,  the  CMA’s  investigation  into  the 
investment consulting sector still took 15 months to complete (and was on the 
back of an earlier market study by the UK’s Financial Conduct Authority that 
lasted around one and a half years).23 Given the consequences that flow from 
the  use  of  the  UK’s  markets  regime,  a  thorough  exercise  of  fact-finding  and 
engagement is essential to ensure that the rights of parties are safeguarded. 

20   See 

https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/media/576c23e4ed915d622c000087/Energy-final-

report-summary.pdf. 

21   See 

https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/7
85547/unlocking_digital_competition_furman_review_web.pdf for more details, para.2.108. 

22   See https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/media/57ac9667e5274a0f6c00007a/retail-banking-

market-investigation-full-final-report.pdf. 

23   See 

https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/media/5c0fee5740f0b60c8d6019a6/ICMI_Final_Report.pdf
. 

816 

 
                                                 
2.27  After considering these issues in the round, there is little evidence that the NCT 

would be effective in tackling the alleged issues raised by the Commission. 

3. 

3.1 

3.2 

3.3 

The NCT’s legal basis under the TFEU 

As  currently  provided  for  in  the  IIA,  the  legal  basis  for  the  NCT Regulation 
would  be  a  combination  of  Articles  103  and  114  TFEU.  In  our  view, 
Articles 103  and  114  TFEU  –  which  also  formed  the  legal  basis  for  the  EU 
Damages  Directive  2014/104/EU  –  appear  insufficient  to  support  the 
Commission’s far-reaching proposal for an NCT, raising serious questions as to 
the constitutionality of the Commission’s initiative, as currently proposed.   

Article  103  TFEU  enables  the  adoption  of  legislation  to  ‘give  effect  to  the 
principles  set  out  in  Articles  101  and  102’  and  address  restrictions  of 
competition.  The  NCT  is  however  aimed  at  creating  new  competition 
enforcement  powers  that  may  be  used  ‘without  any  prior  finding  of  an 
infringement’ of Articles 101 and/or 102 TFEU. Hence, the NCT cannot be said 
‘to give effect to the principles set out in Articles 101 and 102’ as reflected in 
Article 103 (1) TFEU. In contrast, the EU Damages Directive codified the EU 
legal  framework  of  established  case  law  on  the  private  enforcement  of 
Articles 101 (and 102) TFEU since the Courage and Crehan case law of the 
CJEU,24 and therefore clearly fell within the ambit of Article 103 (2) (e) TFEU.   

Article  114  TFEU  forms  the  legal  basis  for  the  EU  to  adopt  legislation  to 
harmonise national laws of the Member States that may hinder free movement 
of goods, services, capital or people and therefore obstruct the internal market. 
Whilst Article 114 TFEU is traditionally regarded as a broad legal basis for the 
EU to take legislative action, we question the validity of Article 114 TFEU as a 
legal  basis  for  the  potential  introduction  of  an  NCT  as  proposed  by  the 
Commission.  Whilst  certain  Member  States  have,  or  are  in  the  process  of, 
enacting new laws to adapt the application of their competition legislation to 
digital  markets,  these  proposals  relate  to  infringements  of  Articles  101 
and 102 TFEU  and  their  national  equivalents,  as  opposed  to  purportedly 
problematic market structures. As such, there does not appear to be a need for 
the  approximation  of  divergent  national  laws  via  the  NCT  pursuant  to 
Article 114 TFEU, nor are there prospects of such divergence in the foreseeable 
future.  

3.4  We understand that Greece and Romania already have legislation providing for 
an  investigation  instrument  similar  to  the  markets’  regime  in  the  United 
Kingdom.  We  are  however  not  aware  of  any  enforcement  practice  by  the 
relevant authorities in Greece and Romania which may have impeded the proper 
functioning of the internal market. Similarly, the proposed amendments to the 
competition laws in some Member States such as Germany and France envisage 
addressing  perceived  competition  problems  in  the  platform  economy  by 
changing  the  law  on  abuse  of  dominance  and  on  merger  control.  Again,  the 
situation appears different compared to the situation that existed at the time of 
the  introduction  of  the  EU  Damages  Directive  –  which  also  relied  on 
Article 114 TFEU  as  a  legal  basis  –  when  there  was  a  perceived  need  to 

24   CJEU, Case C-453/99. 

916 

 
                                                 
approximate the laws of civil procedure of the Member States to facilitate the 
private enforcement of Articles 101 and 102 TFEU.  

3.5  We  therefore  consider  that  the  legal  basis  for  the  proposed  NCT  should  be 
reconsidered.  During  the preparation of the EUMR there  was  also a debate25 
about the appropriate legal basis for this new legislative tool and in the end the 
predecessor of Article 352 TFEU was chosen. Article 352 TFEU may also form 
an  appropriate  legal  basis  for  the  proposed  NCT  as  envisaged  by  the 
Commission. Given the far-reaching nature of the NCT, having the full support 
of all the Council members and the involvement of the national parliaments as 
reflected in Article 352 (2) TFEU would lend appropriate authority and support 
to  any  new  instrument  conferring  such  far-reaching  new  powers  on  the 
Commission.  The  German  Monopolies  Commission  recently  opined  that  the 
appropriate legal basis for any ex ante platform regulation would be Article 352 
TFEU  in  conjunction  with  Article  103  TFEU,  as  such  a  platform  regulation 
would supplement the existing platform-related regulatory framework that the 
EU has already adopted.26 

3.6  We  would  therefore  encourage  the  Commission  to  carefully  reconsider  the 
appropriate legal basis for the introduction of the NCT, both as a fundamental 
constitutional concern and in order to avoid legal dispute post-adoption of any 
NCT legislation. 

4. 

The  NCT’s  relationship  with  Articles  101  and  102  TFEU  and  the  DSA 
package 

(a) Overlap with Articles 101 and 102 TFEU 

4.1 

The IIA suggests that there could be a material overlap in the scope of the NCT 
and Articles 101 and 102 TFEU, if the Commission considers that issues cannot 
be addressed by existing tools ‘in the most effective manner’.27 Further, the IIA 
notes  that  the  NCT  will  have  a  role  in  ‘allowing  for  timely  and  effective 
intervention against structural competition problems across markets’ (emphasis 
added).28 This highlights the importance of defining a properly scoped role for 
any NCT. If the Commission could intervene using the NCT in any instances 
where it perceives that Articles 101 and 102 TFEU could be applicable but may 
not  address  the  Commission’s  concerns  ‘in  the  most  effective  manner’,  this 
could effectively render Articles 101 and 102 TFEU redundant.  

4.2 

Furthermore, before making proposals creating extensive changes to the law, it 
is  incumbent  on  the  Commission  to  explain  why  it  cannot  address  perceived 
timeliness  issues  by  means  of  more  effective  case  management  under  the 
existing  rules.  In  our  experience  as  one  of  the  leading  advisers  on  antitrust 

25   Anand Pathak, EEC Concentration Control: The Foreseeable Uncertainties, ECLR [1990], 119, 122. 

26   German  Monopolies  Commission,  XXIII  Biennial  Report  ‘Competition  2020’,  para.  90, 

https://monopolkommission.de/images/HG23/HGXXIII_Gesamt.pdf. 

27   Commission, NCT IIA, 4 June 2020, Section A. 

28   Ibid. 

1016 

 
                                                 
4.3 

4.4 

4.5 

investigations before the Commission, there may indeed be considerable scope 
for gains in that regard which could be more effective than a change in the law.  

Further,  if  the  Commission  is  proposing  that  it  may  use  the  NCT  in  many 
instances where it will enable the Commission to address perceived structural 
risks and problems in a timelier manner than under the current rules, this would 
amount to a radical expansion of the Commission’s powers. If the Commission 
need only prove that a perceived competition problem will be dealt with more 
quickly through the NCT than under the current regime, the legal safeguards 
inherent in Articles 101 and 102 TFEU may be freely circumvented in the name 
of speed, disregarding the necessary due process. 

In this context, it should also be borne in mind that a wide overlap between the 
scope  of  the  NCT  and  established  enforcement  rules  would  lead  to  legal 
uncertainty and unintended consequences for competition in the EEA. It will be 
especially important in that regard to ensure that the NCT could not be used in 
such  a  way  as  might  circumvent  the  evidentiary  standards  and  procedural 
safeguards  applicable  in  relation  to  Articles  101  and  102  TFEU  or  the 
jurisprudence of the CJEU. 

It would also be undesirable to be in a situation where the legal instrument used 
by the European Commission became a moving target (or rather a moving tool). 
If one were to think of an investigation in a complex market which is initiated 
under  Article  101  TFEU,  the  NCT  should  then  not  be  used  as  a  fall  back  to 
resolve  the  case  if  a  violation  of  Article  101  cannot  be  established  on  the 
evidence by the European Commission. This applies even more so under Article 
102 TFEU, where the outcome of an investigation by the Commission is even 
more dependent on a proper assessment of the factual and economic evidence 
against the appropriate legal standard. Any inability to identify and prove to the 
required legal standard a theory of harm in an investigation based on Article 102 
TFEU  should  not  encourage  the  Commission  to  recycle  the  issues  in  the 
investigation under the NCT with a view to imposing remedies or ‘extracting’ 
some commitments on the basis of a factual and economic record which would 
not have justified intervention under existing competition law. 

(b) Overlap with the Digital Services Act package 

4.6 

Similarly,  whilst  the  IIA  asserts  that  the  NCT  is  complementary  to  the 
Commission’s  ‘ex  ante  regulatory  instrument  of  very  large  online  platforms 
acting as gatekeepers’ (Ex Ante Gatekeeper Regulation) which forms part of 
the  Digital  Services  Act  package,29  the  two  legislative  initiatives  seem  to 
significantly  overlap.  In  determining  its  approach  to  tackling  any  perceived 
issues in digital markets, the Commission should ensure that this overlap is not 
manifested 
through  over-legislation  and/or  conflicting  provisions.  The 
relationship between the NCT and the Ex Ante Gatekeeper Regulation would 

29   Commission,  Proposal  for  a  Regulation:  Digital  Services  Act  package  –  ex  ante  regulatory 
June  2020, 

instrument  of  very 
https://ec.europa.eu/info/law/better-regulation/have-your-say/initiatives/12418-Digital-Services-
Act-package-ex-ante-regulatory-instrument-of-very-large-online-platforms-acting-as-gatekeepers. 

large  online  platforms  acting  as  gatekeepers,  2 

1116 

 
                                                 
4.7 

4.8 

4.9 

therefore need to be carefully managed and separated to  avoid fragmentation 
and guarantee legal certainty for market participants. 

Another issue is that under the proposed Digital Services Act, the approach and 
strategy taken by the European Union towards gatekeeper companies would be 
bifurcated  between  the  ex  ante  legislation  proposed  by  DG  CNECT  and  the 
intervention chosen by DG COMP. Indeed, DG CNECT proposes to change and 
expand the existing internal market P2B Regulation (EU) 2019/1150. Once this 
has been achieved, digital companies will face two sources of intervention: (i) 
legislation  and  the  updated  Regulation  2019/1150;  and  (ii)  additional 
discretionary intervention under the powers of DG COMP which may deviate 
from or complement the tools provided for by the legislator in the new Ex Ante 
Gatekeeper Regulation. This would hardly seem a desirable result from a legal 
certainty standpoint. 

The inadequacy of overlapping legislative regimes is evidenced in the area of 
telecoms  regulation,  which  is  regulated  by  a  mixture  of  parallel  enforcement 
tools – namely ex ante telecoms regulation law and ex post competition law. In 
this  field,  the  Union  Courts  developed  an  untidy  solution  in  the  Deutsche 
Telekom set of cases, whereby the CJEU broadly concluded that ‘[…] it is only 
if anti-competitive conduct is required of undertakings by national legislation, 
or if the latter creates a legal framework which itself eliminates any possibility 
of competitive activity on their party, that Articles [101 and 102 TFEU] do not 
apply. […] Articles [101 and 102 TFEU] may apply, however, if it is found that 
the national legislation leaves open the possibility of competition which may be 
prevented, restricted or distorted by autonomous conduct of undertakings.’30 

The  CJEU  has  upheld  the  decision  previously  handed  down  by  the  General 
Court  in  case  T-271/03,  Deutsche  Telekom  v  Commission,  which  stated  that 
Deutsche Telekom’s liability for margin squeeze under Article 102 TFEU holds 
even if national law ‘encourages or makes it easier for undertakings to engage 
in autonomous anti-competitive conduct’31 and even if the incumbent’s prices 
had first to be approved by the national regulatory authority.32 Even where the 
national  regulatory  authority  had  approved  the  access  tariff  under  the 
telecommunications  regime,  Deutsche  Telekom  was  not  shielded  from  a 
decision that this tariff was still considered to be an unlawful margin squeeze 
under Article 102 TFEU.33  

4.10  While  the  principle  that  the  Commission  may  intervene  using  existing 
competition law and take a different view of decisions approved by a national 
sectoral  regulator  has  been  established  by  the  courts,  the  possibility  of 

30   CJEU, Case C-280/08 P, para.80.  

31   General Court, Case T-271/03, para.89.  

32   Ibid., para.107. 

33   Indeed, the General Court followed this approach in Telefónica (Case T-336/07) where it was held 
that prior price approval by the national regulator, even if granted after an ex ante examination of the 
possibility  of  a  margin  squeeze,  could  not  exempt  Telefónica  from  consideration  under 
Article 102 TFEU. 

1216 

 
                                                 
conflicting  decisions  taken  at  the  European  level  under  parallel  European 
regimes would be unfortunate and create legal uncertainty. 

4.11  Besides,  to  provide  an  example  from  the  analogue  business  world,  the  NCT 
could  enable the Commission to take  a different  approach towards  enforcing 
parallel  trade  restrictions.  We  submit  that  it  would  be  inappropriate  if  the 
Commission  sought,  for  example,  to  apply  the  NCT  to  pharmaceutical 
wholesalers  whose  arrangements  reflect  existing  case  law  relating  to  parallel 
imports and the grey market. Changing accepted arrangements that have been 
recognised as valid under the law by the Union Courts in this area would in our 
view not be an appropriate object for an intervention under the NCT. 

4.12  The two proposed regimes subject to the Commission’s current considerations 
in  the  modernisation  of  EU  competition  law  (the  Ex  Ante  Gatekeeper 
Regulation and the NCT) are EU secondary law instruments and are, as such, 
differentiated from the relationship between EU primary and secondary law that 
arose  in  the  Deutsche  Telekom  case.  Given  both  regimes  constitute  EU 
secondary law, based on the application of the hierarchy of norms, a decision 
under one regime has equivalent status to a decision under the other. However, 
it  would  be  worthwhile  for  the  Commission  to  establish  a  safe  harbour 
specifically delineating this point, whereby an assessment and/or finding by it 
under  one  regime  would  preclude  the  Commission  from  further  assessment 
under  the  other  regime.  Such  a  safe  harbour  would  provide  clarity  and  legal 
certainty for undertakings.  

5. 

5.1 

5.2 

Need for a clear legal test 

The IIA does not meaningfully address the critical issue of the relevant legal 
test, limiting itself to noting that ‘similar to already existing competition tools 
of this kind, [the NCT] would be based on a test allowing the Commission to 
intervene  when  a  structural  risk  for  competition  or  a  structural  lack  of 
competition prevents the internal market from functioning properly.’34  

Clarity on the applicable legal test for intervention is essential to safeguard the 
rule of law and ensure that companies enjoy the requisite legal certainty already 
provided by Articles 101 and 102 TFEU.35 A clear definition of the notions of 
a ‘structural risk for competition’ and a ‘structural lack of competition’ and the 
requisite  standard  of  proof  in  establishing  the  existence  of  ‘structural 
competition problems’ is necessary. Additionally, the Commission would need 
to consider and issue clear guidelines detailing how it would identify ‘structural 
competition  problems’,  including  the  prevailing  characteristics  in  such 
purportedly  problematic  markets  and  how  it  would  benchmark  against 
competitive  markets.  Any  effective  public  consultation  on  the  NCT  must 
address these core points in detail and we look forward to commenting on these 

34   Commission, NCT IIA, 4 June 2020, Section B. 

35   The principles of legal certainty and the protection of legitimate expectation as such constitute general 
principles of EU law, see CJEU, Case C-184/14, para.30; Opinion of Advocate General Nils Wahl, 
Case C-194/14 P, para.87. 

1316 

 
                                                 
5.3 

5.4 

6. 

6.1 

6.2 

points  further  in  any  future  consultation  in  which  these  important  issues  are 
addressed. 

The  NCT  could  empower  the  Commission  to  pursue  its  industrial  policy 
objectives  by  changing  the  structure  of  certain  markets  or  by  requiring  law-
abiding companies to modify their competitive behaviour on the market. Given 
that  the  NCT  - as currently proposed  - does not  focus  primarily  on unlawful 
behaviour, the NCT may empower the Commission to reshape an industry in 
the  same  way  as  would  normally  be  achieved  by  internal  market  legislation 
adopted  through  the  legislative  process.  This  has  occurred  in  many 
conventional, notably utility, industries such as energy, telecommunications and 
rail. The NCT could provide the Commission, and in particular DG COMP, with 
a  shortcut  to  intervene  in  a  market  in  a  manner  which  historically  in  the 
European Union has been the reserved domain of legislation emanating from 
the  Council  and  the  European  Parliament.  This  could  increase  the  perceived 
democratic deficit in the enforcement of European competition law seen in the 
State aid field and in cases where, as a result of enforcing Articles 101 and/or 
102 TFEU, the Commission accepts far-reaching remedies from the companies 
involved under Article 9 of Regulation 1/2003. 

Of course, the NCT itself would be adopted by the Council and the European 
Parliament. Once adopted, however, it is entirely for the Commission to target 
specific  companies  or  sectors  and  to  select  the  remedies  which  it  considers 
appropriate. In this there seems to be a tension between the normal prerequisites 
of  a  parliamentary  and  democratic  legislative  process  and  the  extraordinary 
powers the European Commission would acquire under the NCT. 

Threshold for the imposition of remedies and need for robust effects-based 
analysis 

The NCT must equally ensure that there is a clearly defined evidential bar for 
the imposition of behavioural or structural remedies and adopt an effects-based 
approach.  This  would  help  ensure  that  any  remedies  imposed  are  necessary, 
proportionate,  properly  designed  and  capable  of  addressing  any  perceived 
issues.  Again,  these  core  issues  are  not  addressed  fully  in  the  current 
consultation  and  we  look  forward  to  considering  them  further  in  any  future 
consultation which sets out a fuller proposal in this respect. 

The IIA states that the Commission’s intervention through the NCT will have 
limited  economic  impact  on  the  undertakings  concerned,  noting  that  ‘the 
Commission  would  not  make  any  finding  of  an  infringement  of  the  EU 
competition  rules,  nor  impose  fines  and  thus  not  generate  rights  to  launch 
damage claims’.36 This is a surprising and counter-intuitive statement in light 
of the wide-ranging nature of the proposed powers which would be conferred 
on  the  Commission.  The  economic  impact  of  behavioural  and/or  structural 
remedies can be vast and indeed has the potential to be much greater than the 
impact of a monetary fine, resulting in radical changes to undertakings’ business 
models and/or the restructuring of entire industries. Indeed, the NCT proposal 

36   Commission, NCT IIA, 4 June 2020, Section B. 

1416 

 
                                                 
6.3 

7. 

7.1 

7.2 

7.3 

appears to be motivated by a desire, at least in part, to have a greater economic 
impact. 

Additionally, the IIA states that ‘the proportionality of the costs incurred would 
be  ensured  by  the  fact  that  such  remedies  have  to  be  limited  to  ensuring  the 
proper  functioning  of  the  market  under  scrutiny.  Consumer  benefits  deriving 
from  the  timely  intervention  under  all  policy  options  should  outweigh  those 
costs.’37  In  this  regard,  robust  effects-based  economic  analysis  is  required, 
balancing the potential anticompetitive effects caused by the ‘structural risks 
for competition’ and/or ‘structural lack of competition’ identified in the market 
in question, with the consumer benefits generated. This is particularly the case 
given  the  importance  placed  by  the  CJEU  on  the  robustness  of  the 
Commission’s effects analysis in the Intel38 and Hutchison39 judgments. 

Establishing  a  fair  process  that  safeguards  companies’  rights  of  defence 
and appeal rights 

The IIA does not provide any details as to the procedural aspects and decision-
making  process  that  the  Commission  will  follow  to  determine  whether 
intervention is warranted and how appropriate remedies will be designed. It is 
imperative  that  the  Commission  ensures  its  process  provides  for  appropriate 
checks and balances to minimise the burden imposed on the companies involved 
and safeguard their rights of defence, good administration and of appeal. 

The Commission will need to consider carefully what appropriate procedural 
safeguards  will  ensure  the  independence  of  the  decision-making  body 
determining  the  existence  of  a  ‘structural  competition  problem’  and  the 
remedies  to  be  imposed,  from  the  case  teams  undertaking  investigations  and 
proposing the remedies. In this regard, we note that other regimes which have 
market investigation procedures, e.g. the UK CMA, are bound by safeguards 
designed to ensure procedural fairness and independence of decision-making. 
The need for separation between the decision-makers who decide to commence 
a market investigation and those who reach the final conclusions at the end of a 
market investigation has been acknowledged in the UK to be important in order 
to safeguard the independence and robustness of market investigations.40 

In particular, careful thought will be required to address issues such as: (i) the 
transparency of the process; (ii) that parties are given access to decision-makers 
and the evidence collected by the Commission; (iii) that parties receive a fair 
hearing on the evidence of the case; and (iv) that parties are afforded sufficient 
time  to  respond  to  requests  for  information  and/or  intermediate  steps  in  the 
investigation (e.g. interim reports, statements of objections, etc.). Furthermore, 
it  will  be  essential  that  any  decisions  taken  under  the  NCT,  given  their  far-

37   Commission, NCT IIA, 4 June 2020, Section C. 

38   CJEU, Case C-413/14 P. 

39   General Court, Case T-399/16. 

40   Amelia  Fletcher,  Market  Investigations  for  Digital  Platforms:  Panacea  or  Complement?  [2020], 

p.11-12, https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3668289. 

1516 

 
                                                 
7.4 

8. 

8.1 

reaching implications, are subject to timely and effective judicial review before 
the European Courts. 

Ultimately, the legitimacy of Commission actions under antitrust law, and the 
regard in which the Commission is held internationally, derives, in part, from 
the legal regime which clearly defines the scope for the Commission’s powers 
and the European regime of effective judicial protection for parties subject to 
those  procedures.  Given  the  potentially  far-reaching  implications  of  the 
Commission’s  NCT  proposals,  investigated  parties’  procedural  rights  and 
entitlement  to  judicial  protection  cannot  be  watered  down.  As  noted  by  the 
President of the General Court Marc van der Woude: ‘[…] where the contested 
conduct of the public authorities is repressive in nature, it is hard to conceive, 
at least in free democratic societies, that citizens and firms can be condemned 
on the basis of estimates, approximations or guesses, even if they are informed 
ones.  Uncertainty  must  then  be  balanced  against  the  requirements  of  the 
presumption of innocence.’41 The Commission should therefore ensure that any 
moves towards remedy-based outcomes does not conflict with the fundamental 
legal protections afforded by the EU legal order.42  

Conclusion 

The introduction of the NCT as currently proposed by the Commission is bound 
to have far-reaching implications and is likely to result in a paradigm shift in 
EU  competition  law  enforcement.  As  the  Commission’s  thinking  around  the 
scope of the NCT evolves, it is crucial that it clearly defines in concrete terms 
the  scope  of  the  issues  the  NCT  is  seeking  to  address  and  any  alleged 
enforcement  gap  which  the  NCT  is  designed  to  fill.  Should  the  Commission 
decide  to  move  ahead  with  the  introduction  of  the  NCT,  it  is  of  paramount 
importance that clarity is provided on the applicable legal test for intervention, 
the threshold for the imposition of remedies and the procedural safeguards for 
the companies involved, to safeguard the rule of law and ensure that companies 
enjoy  the  requisite  legal  certainty  already  provided  by  Articles  101  and 
102 TFEU.  

8.2  We would urge the Commission to engage openly with interested parties in the 
next steps of its consultation in developing its further thinking on whether any, 
and if so what, steps should be taken to address any perceived enforcement gaps 
while maintaining Europe’s reputation for a clear legal framework and effective 
judicial protection, which underlines the legitimacy of Commission actions in 
the realm of antitrust.  

*** 

41   Marc  van  der  Woude,  Judicial  Control  in  Complex  Economic  Matters,  Journal  of  European 
Issue  7,  September  2019,  p.415–423, 

Competition  Law  &  Practice,  Volume  10, 
https://doi.org/10.1093/jeclap/lpz037.  

42   In accordance with Article 6 of the European Convention of Human Rights and Articles 47 and 48 of 

the EU Charter of Fundamental Rights. 

1616 

 
 
                                                 
