Delivery Hero SE 

Ref. Ares(2020)4690843 - 08/09/2020

Oranienburger Str. 70 
10117 Berlin 

P +49(0)30 544 459 000 
W www.deliveryhero.com 

Delivery Hero SE Oranienburger Str. 70 10117 Berlin 

New Competition Tool | Position Paper 

Delivery Hero welcomes the opportunity to provide its observations in response to the proposal by the 
European Commission for a New Competition Tool (“NCT”). This submission presents an overview of 
Delivery Hero’s  observations on selected areas of the NCT. 

Delivery Hero provides online and food delivery services and currently has operations in 43 countries, 
across four main geographical regions: Europe, the Middle East and North Africa, Asia and the Americas. 
Delivery Hero was founded in 2011 and is headquartered in Berlin, Germany. Delivery Hero’s subsidiaries 
operate platforms in the local markets, connecting consumers with vendors. Delivery is carried out either 
through the “marketplace” model, where vendors carry out the delivery, or the “own delivery” model, 
where the Delivery Hero platform carries out the delivery.  

The food delivery sector is highly competitive and dynamic, for a number of reasons. Delivery Hero 
competes not only with other food delivery platforms, but also with restaurants themselves that offer 
direct ordering on the phone, online, or in person. The barriers to entry and expansion are low; there is 
no one prescribed route to entry or growth, and there are numerous business propositions that 
companies can adopt in order to penetrate, including expanding an existing tech or e-commerce business 
or restaurants developing their own website or app. Furthermore, the amount of initial capital required is 
low, in part due to the fact that new entrants can start at a local level (e.g. one city, or certain areas 
within a city) and expand.  

As regards in particular the need to adopt the NCT, Delivery Hero believes that there is no “enforcement 
gap” in the current EU competition regime. The NCT identifies two types of “structural” competition 
problems that the existing enforcement toolkit cannot supposedly not address: (i) “Structural risks for 
competition” where certain market characteristics and the conduct of the companies operating in the 
markets create a threat for competition and (ii) “Structural market failure”, where a market is displaying 
systemic failures going beyond the conduct of a particular company with market power  and oligopolistic 
market structures with an increased risk for tacit collusion. To the contrary, we believe that Article 101 
TFEU and Article 102 TFEU are both flexible enough to allow the European Commission to address these 

Page 1 of 2 

Vorstand / Members of the Executive Board:  
Niklas Östberg (CEO), Emmanuel Thomassin (CFO)  
Aufsichtsratsvorsitzender / Chairman  
of the Supervisory Board: Dr. Martin Enderle  
Sitz / Registered office: Berlin   
Amtsgericht / District Court: Charlottenburg  
Handelsregister / Commercial Register:  
HRB 198015 B 
UID-Nummer: DE815294913  

UniCredit Bank AG - HypoVereinsbank 
IBAN: DE78 1002 0890 0024 1042 22 
BIC/SWIFT: HYVEDEMM488 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
issues and any new competition theory of harm, including in relation to the digital sector, as the European 
Commission’s and EU Courts' more recent decisional practice has demonstrated.  

Delivery Hero is particularly concerned about the level of regulatory burden and legal uncertainty that the 
NCT would create, as it will ultimately put brakes on innovation and competition. Setting restrictions or 
imposing commitments absent proven harm will not re-enforce competition but rather dampen it, and 
ultimately harm consumers. Any tool granting the European Commission such discretionary powers to set 
restrictions where there is no proven harm must in any event be counterbalanced by robust safeguards 
such that rights of defence and principles of checks and balances are maintained.  

In addition, based on the current proposals the NCT appears to be substantially similar to the  platform-
specific ex ante regulation included in the Digital Services Act, since both appear at least partially to target 
companies “acting as gatekeepers”. In addition, we understand that the enforcement of both tools will be 
led by two different Directorates-General (CNECT and COMP, respectively). We believe that these 
overlapping initiatives present the risk of a lack of clarity regarding the competences between the 
Directorates-General and subsequently of the consistency of enforcement. Further, such overlapping 
initiatives increase the burden for the companies to identify the relevant scope of application and may 
thus ultimately create legal uncertainty for them.  

Finally, we note that the proposal for the NCT also overlaps with legislative initiatives in certain Member 
States, and it is unclear from the current proposal how the competencies between the European 
Commission and the Member States will operate in relation to these. In order to avoid enforcement 
inconsistencies between the Member States and the European Commission as well as the ultimate 
regulatory burden and subsequent risk of legal uncertainty for companies active in various Member 
States, this must be adequately addressed.  

Page 2 of 2 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
