Ref. Ares(2020)4722283 - 09/09/2020

ETNO-GSMA Position Paper 
on a New Competition Tool

September 2020

About the GSMA

About ETNO

The GSMA represents the interests of mobile 
operators worldwide, uniting more than 750 
operators and nearly 400 companies in the broader 
mobile ecosystem, including handset and device 
makers, software companies, equipment providers 
and internet companies, as well as organisations in 
adjacent industry sectors. The GSMA also produces 
the industry-leading MWC events held annually in 
Barcelona, Los Angeles and Shanghai, as well as the 
Mobile 360 Series of regional conferences.

ETNO is the European Telecommunications Network 
Operators’ Association. We proudly represent 
Europe’s main telecom operators, who innovate 
and invest in the continent’s digital backbone. 
Our companies are the providers of Europe’s 
most advanced digital networks and services. 
ETNO’s mission is to develop a positive policy and 
regulatory environment empowering the delivery 
of world-class services for European citizens and 
businesses.

For more information, please visit the GSMA 
corporate website at gsma.com

www.etno.eu | @ETNOAssociation 

Follow the GSMA on Twitter:
@GSMA 
@GSMAEurope 

GSMA-ETNO position paper on a New Competition Tool

3

1. Executive Summary

ETNO & GSMA associations, which represent the 
vast majority of telecom operators in the European 
Union, welcome the opportunity to provide input 
to DG Competition on the possibility to introduce a 
New Competition Tool (NCT). In summary,  ETNO 
& GSMA European mobile and fixed telecom 
operator’s position on the matter and response to 
the Commission’s Inception Impact Assessment 
and questionnaire is as follows:

• The existing competition framework is fit for 
purpose; however, it needs to be revised in order 
to be able to address the challenges brought by 
the digital economy. Both associations welcome 
the Commission’s efforts and ongoing reviews and 
believe that the Commission should focus on such 
revisions before introducing any additional tools;

• In order to ensure a smart and faster 
enforcement process, DG COMP could make an 
increasing use of existing measures, such as sector 
enquiries and interim measures;

• Structural competition problems mentioned 
in the questionnaire relate to large digital actors 
and should therefore be addressed by imposing 

specific measures to such actors when competition 
law has proven to be insufficient. This is being 
tackled currently by the DSA proposal on ex-ante 
rules for large platforms acting as gatekeepers. 
Therefore, there is no need for a NCT. However, 
we do not exclude the possibility that competition 
policy should be able to issue targeted actions 
towards digital gatekeepers;   

• Articles 103 and 114 TFEU do not seem to 
provide the adequate legal basis for introducing 
a tool following the options expressed by the 
Commission in its IIA;

• If the Commission decides nevertheless to 
propose the introduction of a NCT: 

- it should be limited to address the structural 
problems deriving from large online platforms 
acting as gatekeepers and therefore limited in 
scope; 
- it should include an adequate system of checks 
and balances to provide market actors with the 
appropriate certainty and rights of defence. 

2. Need to Update Current Competition Law Framework 
Rather than Introducing a New Competition Tool 

ETNO & GSMA believe that the current competition 
principles and toolbox are fit for purpose and 
encourage DG COMP to continue first with the 
ongoing review of the competition law framework 
before considering introducing any additional 
tools. As both associations have proposed in their 
responses to previous consultations1, there is a 
need to evaluate and an opportunity to update and 
adapt existing tools and methodologies to the new 
digital environment. The ex-post intervention has 
in fact shown at times new challenges due to the 
specific characteristics of these actors.
We believe that the following suggestions would 

help DG COMP to ensure a faster and smarter ex-
post intervention.

On the one hand, Regulation 1/20032 establishes 
wide-range powers that DG COMP can more 
systematically use in order to tackle competition 
problems related to the presence of digital players, 
in particular:

• Use of sector enquiry powers (Article 17): 
a further use of sector inquiries would help 
understand market failures, as well as provide 
crucial input to potential revisions or introduction 

1. Please refer to the joint response to the NCT questionnaire and/or to www.gsma.com/gsmaeurope/ and etno.eu/

2. Council Regulation (EC) No 1/2003 of 16 December 2002 on the implementation of the rules on competition laid down in Articles 81 and 82 of the Treaty

 
GSMA-ETNO position paper on a New Competition Tool

4

of legislation, having DG COMP making 
suggestions to regulators with the “ex-ante 
remedies” power left to the discretion of the sector 
specific regulator;

• Imposition of behavioural or structural 
remedies (Article 7 and recital 12) in an ex-post 
intervention; and

• Wider use of interim measures (Article 8), 
limited in scope and time, like those imposed 
in October 2019 for the first time in nearly two 
decades, to ensure fast intervention and avoid 
irreparable damages to the market, consumers and 
competitors.

On the other hand, the ongoing reviews of the 
Horizontal and Vertical rules, the Market Definition 
Notice and the merger control framework should 
be carefully carried out taking into consideration 
the increasing digitalisation and globalisation of 
the economy as well as the competitive dynamics 
described in this document and our response to 
the NCT consultation as examples of structural 
competitive problems. 

Both associations have in their responses to DG 
COMP’s questionnaires mentioned what this 
should mean with regard to vertical agreements 
(a stricter approach towards agreements 
contributing to the extension of market power in 
neighbouring markets) and horizontal agreements 
(a more lenient approach and enhanced legal 
clarity vis-à-vis cooperative agreements between 
traditional actors seeking to create sufficient scale). 
These forms of cooperation are in general pro-
competitive as they allow to achieve the necessary 
scale for the European firms to be competitive vis-
à-vis global actors.

Furthermore, we kindly invite the Commission 
to also review the Communication on the 
Commission’s Enforcement Priorities in Applying 
Article 102 TFEU to address the challenges created 
by the digital economy.

In relation to a more efficient use of existing 
tools, the Commission should speed up antitrust 
processes and make more use of its existing 
powers (e.g. to impose interim measures) as 
highlighted above.  

3. Structural Competition Problems Relate to Large Digital 
Platforms Acting as Gatekeepers and Should be Tackled by 
Specific Measures Targeting Such Actors 

As said, the Commission should make use of its 
existing powers to intervene where there has 
been or might be a breach of competition rules. 
We highly believe that an updated competition 
framework, in combination with targeted 
intervention in relation to digital gatekeepers 
could allow the Commission to address structural 
competition problems mentioned in this 
consultation. 

Indeed, we recognise that there might be limits 
to what the current way of applying existing 
competition rules can achieve to address the 
gatekeeper role that large online platforms play in 
certain markets, in particular, those characterised 
by extreme economies of scale and scope, strong 
network effects and access to large volumes 
of data. The current way of applying existing 
competition rules might not always be sufficient to 

GSMA-ETNO position paper on a New Competition Tool

5

tackle competition issues arising from large digital 
platforms with cross-market activity in an efficient 
and timely manner, due to the specificities of these 
platforms. Therefore, dedicated measures targeted 
at large online platforms acting as gatekeepers 
might be necessary to prevent and/or address 
competition distortions, before entrenched and 
durable dominance materialises in digital markets.

More specifically, as mentioned in our responses 
to the NCT and DSA consultations, an intervention 
framework, adopted in the context of the DSA, 
allowing for the possibility to impose tailored 
remedies on individual large online platforms 
with gatekeeper power, on a case- by-case basis 
would be the most suitable instrument to ensure 
competition and contestability in dynamic digital 
markets. This framework could be complemented 
by a list of prohibitions generally applicable to 
all large online platforms with gatekeeper power 
as a baseline safeguard against certain abusive 
behaviours. However, the latter option alone would 
be insufficient to address market failures related 
to large online platforms with gatekeeper role in a 
targeted and proportionate manner. Therefore, we 
have strongly supported the option 3b of the IIA 
of the DSA consultation allowing for the possibility 
to impose tailored remedies on individual large 

online platforms with gatekeeper power, on a case- 
by-case basis. Moreover, a combination of option 
3b with option 3a as a complement could also be 
suitable.

In light of the above, there is an overlap and 
potential inconsistency between the regulatory 
framework allowing for a case-by-case imposition 
of targeted remedies under option 3b of the DSA 
IIA, and the New Competition Tool. We believe that 
only one instrument, if properly defined in its scope 
and through an efficient institutional setup, is 
necessary to tackle asymmetries and competition 
issues raised in the markets where digital platforms 
with a gatekeeper role operate.

In conclusion, DG COMP should only consider 
introducing a New Competition Tool if the 
combination of the above mentioned tools 
together with an update of the way of applying 
existing competition rules will prove to be 
insufficient to address the  structural competition 
problems identified in the consultation. Such 
tool would therefore be limited to tackle the 
outstanding problems and would have a much 
narrower scope of application than the one 
presently envisaged in the ongoing consultation. 

4. Legal Basis to justify the Need for a New Competition 
Tool

It is not clear whether articles 103 and 114 TFEU 
provide an adequate legal basis for introducing 
such a tool. In this regard, we doubt that 
article 103 TFEU could be the legal basis for a 
competition tool operating outside 101 and 102 
TFEU (i.e. options 3 and 4 in the Inception Impact 
Assessment). 

As regards options 1 and 2, as the tool would 
apply (according to the questionnaire and the IIA) 
in the absence of a competition law breach, we 
have some difficulties in understanding how 103 
TFEU would be an adequate legal basis for these 

solutions. 103 TFEU is in fact specifically aimed at 
ensuring compliance and defining the scope of 
application of Articles 101 and 102 TFEU3.

As regards Article 114 TFEU, this would be the 
adequate legal basis should the new tool be 
an internal market investigation tool aimed at 
harmonising national laws rather than introducing 
additional powers for the implementation of 
general principles of the Treaty. 

In this regard, the fact that in parallel the 
Commission is working on introducing other tools 

3. Aside of other non-substantial roles such as defining the functions of the Commission and the European Courts or determining the relationship between EU and 
national competition rules.

GSMA-ETNO position paper on a New Competition Tool

6

(i.e. the DSA regulatory tools) whose legal basis 
is clearly linked to the harmonisation process and 
to the completion and protection of the internal 
market, makes it at least questionable to use the 
same legal basis for a competition law tool serving 
the same or similar purposes. 

In conclusion, as it is clear from this questionnaire 
as well as from the IIA that the new tool would deal 
with structural competition problems, we believe 
that article 114 TFEU does not seem to be the 

adequate legal basis for it. 

Last, even if Articles 103 and 114 TFEU would 
constitute an adequate legal basis (quod non!) 
a thorough application of the Proportionality 
Principle should be at the basis of the scope of 
application of a new tool. Accordingly, a new 
tool should be applied only to situations and 
enforcement gaps which cannot be adequately 
tackled by using other less invasive measures.

5. No Need for a New Competition Tool. 
If Needed, the NCT Should Focus on Digital Actors. In 
Any Case, Check & Balances are Crucial to Avoid Legal 
Uncertainty and Regulatory Overreach

As expressed, ETNO & GSMA members believe 
that there is no need at the present stage to 
introduce additional competition tools as defined 
in the Inception Impact Assessment for NCT  unless 
and until the existing tools as well as the other, less 
invasive measures listed above have proven to be 
insufficient to address the structural competition 
problems described in the questionnaire. 

If a new tool were to be introduced, we strongly 
believe that it should be limited to address the 
structural problems deriving from large online 
platforms acting as gatekeepers. Its intervention 
should therefore be tailored to address only 
exceptional situations where alternative 
instruments have demonstrated being ineffective 
(burden of proof on the Commission) and be 
based on strict triggering criteria. The intervention 
should therefore be limited to some predetermined 
digital actors based on a thorough analysis of the 
recurrence of the above mentioned, pre-defined 
elements.

Once again, we consider that all alternative 
possibilities should be explored (modifying 
guidelines, interim measures, DSA-style ex ante 
regulation, etc.). Once all the alternatives have 
been considered, if there are still some structural 

competition problems that cannot be addressed by 
alternative, less intrusive measures, a new tool can 
be taken into consideration that will be applicable 
only to those situations where these problems are 
present (i.e. structural problems deriving from large 
online platforms acting as gatekeepers presenting 
the characteristics described in the questionnaire).

In this case, the new tool should be drafted 
respecting the letter and spirit of the principle 
of Proportionality as laid down in Article 5 of the 
Treaty on European Union. According to Article 
5, “the content and form of Union action shall not 
exceed what is necessary to achieve the objectives 
of the Treaties”. Accordingly, the characteristics 
and scope of application of the new tool, if 
required, will need to be designed taking in the 
utmost account the need to only address situations 
which: (a) respond to the specific need to achieve 
the objectives of the Treaties and; (b) cannot 
be addressed through existing or less intrusive 
measures. This tool shall therefore address 
structural competition problems related to specific 
characteristics of large digital platforms acting as 
gatekeepers. 

Furthermore, we do not consider that any new 
tool should be extended to oligopoly markets. We 

GSMA-ETNO position paper on a New Competition Tool

7

do not believe that oligopolistic market situations 
are per se problematic. Indeed, competitive issues 
related to the functioning of oligopolies have little 
or nothing to do with the structural competitive 
problems that the new tool allegedly should 
address (tipping, monopolisation, gatekeeping, 
etc.)

Additionally, despite that these “oligopolistic” 
markets have maintained the same or similar 
structure along many years, there are few 
examples of collusive behaviour successfully 
tackled by competition authorities in such markets, 
for example when looking at telecommunication 
markets. 

Last but not least, we consider that Articles 101 
and 102 TFEU and existing case law are sufficiently 
effective to address anti-competitive behaviour 
in oligopolistic markets and do not believe there 
is any justification for any additional intervention 
going beyond a thorough application of the 
relevant case law on collective dominance and 
concerted practices. 

In the event that the Commission nevertheless 
decides to introduce a new tool, to ensure legal 
certainty and avoid regulatory overreach, we 
strongly believe that procedural safeguards must 
be at the heart of its deployment:

• A new tool should not give the Commission an 
indiscriminate power to intervene in markets on 
the basis of indicative economic indicators (e.g. 
UPP – GUPPI – HHI – etc.)

• In addition, if a particular market is subject to 
existing regulation, this should be considered 
as a first port of call to address any identified 
competition problems. This is to ensure that 
any new tool is not be applied unless the existing 
regulation is not addressing or is not capable to 
effectively address the problem. This is necessary 
to ensure there is no duplication or inconsistency, 
and to avoid double jeopardy scenarios. In case the 
market is already subject to asymmetric sector-
specific regulation it should be assessed whether 

an existing sector-specific regulator will be best 
placed to address any competition problems.

• Checks & balances: there must be additional 
controls on the trigger of this power to provide 
more certainty to market actors; there needs to 
be a mechanism to ensure that the selection of 
markets for investigation are not perceived as 
arbitrary or politically motivated.

• The geographic dimension of markets in the 
scope should go beyond the national dimension: 
DG COMP’s current competence to intervene 
regards cases having an European dimension and/
or Union interest4. A new competition tool should 
follow the same approach.

• Possibility for the targeted company(ies) to 
express views during the whole process: the 
CMA’s MI tool sets out a continuous dialogue 
between the firm and the CMA, mainly by means 
of formal hearings and remedies hearings when 
the Market Study turns to a Market Reference. DG 
COMP should allow for this continuous feedback 
during the procedure until the final result when the 
Market Study turns to the Market Reference where 
there is a higher likelihood that remedies might be 
imposed.

• DG COMP’s decisions after a market investigation 
procedure should focus on recommendations to 
policymakers and sectorial regulators and where 
necessary remedies on market actors. Furthermore, 
a tool should be allowed only as a last resource to 
impose structural remedies as divestiture remedies 
can be drastic and fundamentally change market 
structure. Stopping company’s business strategies 
or models when there is no breach of competition 
rules should in any case be considered as an 
intrusive penalty even if the monetary implications 
are indirect. 

• Remedies should apply also to adjacent markets 
where no dominance is yet established, or which 
are still untipped but where certain forms of tying 
has led to leveraging of market power from the 
market under review in adjacent markets. 

4. The European Commission (based on European Courts’ case-law since Automec) has been given great discretion to reject, shelve or prioritize cases on the basis of 
Community/EU interest and/or Community Dimension of the cases.

GSMA-ETNO position paper on a New Competition Tool

8

• A potential tool should not be able to impose 
fines or penalties when there is no infringement 
of competition rules. In addition, we believe that 
structural remedies should only be considered 
as a last resort and would be disproportionate 
in circumstances where no infringement of 
competition law would need to be demonstrated. 
Moreover, if the Commission is ultimately given 
power to impose structural remedies under a NCT 
(if any), as structural remedies are very severe 
sanctions they should only ever be used as a last 
resort and subject to a very strict burden of proof 
(i.e. necessity, proportionality).

• In terms of remedies following any 
subsequent intervention via a new tool, where 
the relevant market is already regulated, these 
should be limited to recommendations to the 
relevant regulator or acceptance of voluntary 
commitments, rather than the imposition of 
behavioural or structural remedies. 

• Quick appeal procedure before the Courts 
(in order to lessen as much as possible, the 
uncertainty and the reputational impact of the 
targeted undertaking).

