Ref. Ares(2020)4722911 - 09/09/2020

Response to European Commission Open Public Consultation  

New Competition Tool  

We  welcome  the  opportunity  to  provide  feedback  to  the  European  Commission’s  Open  Public 
Consultation (‘Consultation’) on the proposed New Competition Tool (‘NCT’).  

A)  EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 

We do not believe that there is a need for the NCT instrument to ensure fair and competitive markets 
with  a  view  to  delivering  lower  prices  and  higher  quality,  as  well  as  more  choice  and  innovation  to 
European  consumers,  because  the  existing  instruments  in  the  European  Commission’s  toolbox 
(enforcement of Articles 101 and 102 TFEU) are sufficient for this purpose. If at all, a smarter and more 
efficient application of the existing tools is required. 

The introduction of the NCT instrument bears the inherent risk of creating legal uncertainty and causing 
unwanted  side-  and  spillover  effects  which  could  have  a  chilling  effect  on  the  competitiveness  of 
European companies.  To the extent that digitalization really raises additional concerns that cannot be 
adequately dealt with by existing tools, these should at most be supplemented by measures focused on 
and  tailored  to  very  large,  dominant  digital  platforms  while  maintaining  and  providing  sufficient  legal 
certainty for potentially affected companies.   

B)  No gap in current EU competition rules 

In  Section  A  of  the  Consultation,  the  European  Commission  notes  that  “[t]he  proposal  for  a  New 
Competition Tool is one of the measures aimed at fulfilling this task [Commissioner Vestager’s tasks in 
the mission letter] by addressing gaps in the current EU competition rules and allowing for timely and 
effective  intervention  against  structural  competition  problems  across  markets.”  The  European 
Commission  goes  on  to  state  that  “[t]he  Commission’s  enforcement  experience  in  both  antitrust  and 
merger cases in various industries points to the existence of structural competition problems that cannot 
be tackled under the EU competition rules while resulting in inefficient market outcomes.” 

The European Commission’s further explanation of the types  of situations that in its view require the 
introduction  of  the  NCT  instrument  are  clearly  focused  on  digital  markets,  in  particular  those 
characterized by large platforms who become or have become gatekeepers for digital- and non-digital 
products  and  services.  To  justify  the  extension  of  the  NCT  instrument  more  widely,  the  European 
Commission merely states that “[w]hile these characteristics are typical for digital markets, they can also 
be found in non-digital markets”, with only the thinnest of arguments that the increasing digitalization of 
the economy requires the NCT instrument to cover the whole economy.  

In our view, this is manifestly not a sufficient basis on which to introduce such a profound change to the 
EU  competition  rules.  We  agree  with  the  characterization  of  the  NCT  instrument  by  a  well-known 
commentator: “The impact of this “tool” on competition law and policy would be impossible to overstate. 
It would be likely to change competition law as we know it, and as developed over decades of thinking, 
debate, precedent and experience1.”  

Most importantly, we do not see a gap in the current EU competition rules as argued by the European 
Commission and thus no justification for the immense impact that the introduction of an NCT would have 
on EU competition law and for companies affected by these rules. 

1  Chillin’Competition  Blog,  Alfonso  Lamadrid,  „Can  This  Be  the  New  Normal?  10  Questions  on  the 
Proposed 
2020 
June 
(https://chillingcompetition.com/2020/06/11/can-this-be-the-new-normal-10-questions-on-the-
proposed-new-competition-tool/).  

Competition 

accessed 

Tool“, 

New 

last 

on 

19 

 
 
 
 
 
The currently existing tools (enforcement of Articles 101 and 102 TFEU) are sufficient to tackle abusive 
practices of very large online platforms. Complaints and the sense of an underenforcement against large 
technology companies is not so much related to the available tools but rather to the lengthy proceedings. 

In addition, the  European  Commission’s current power to conduct sector inquiries  already allows the 
European Commission to conduct deep probes into specific industries. Even though the instrument of 
the sector inquiry per se does not give the European Commission the possibility to impose remedies, 
such remedies of course can be imposed if breaches of the competition law rules are revealed in the 
course of a sector inquiry. This shows that the current instruments are sufficient since there would not 
be any justification to impose remedies on companies that are not in breach of competition law. 

For these reasons, we do not believe that there is a gap in current EU competition rules. 

C)  No sufficient legal basis 

Articles 103 and 114 TFEU which are mentioned in the Roadmap are no adequate legal basis for the 
introduction of a NCT.  

Article 103 TFEU allows the enactment of legislation to “give effect to the principles set out in Articles 
101 and 102”. However, the NCT, instead of giving effect to the principles set out in Articles 101 and 
102 TFEU rather provides for an ex ante intervention without the requirement for a prior infringement of 
competition law. It therefore creates new competition enforcement powers for which Art. 103 TFEU is 
not a sufficient legal basis. 

Article 114 TFEU is the legal basis for a harmonization of national laws of the Member States in order 
to avoid a fragmentation of the internal market. However, according to the Roadmap, the NCT does not 
aim at removing distortions of competition law but rather at eliminating structural deficits and risks that 
are below the thresholds of competition law. Therefore, also Article 114 TFEU is no adequate basis for 
the introduction of a NCT. 

D)  NCT instrument would be disproportionate 

In Section A of the Consultation, the European Commission notes that the current EU competition rules 
enable it to enforce against anticompetitive agreements under Article 101 TFEU and against abuses of 
a dominant position under Article 102 TFEU. It then goes on to say that “[t]he enforcement experience 
of the Commission and national competition authorities, and the reflection process on the fitness of the 
existing competition rules have helped identify certain structural competition problems that these rules 
cannot tackle (e.g. monopolisation strategies by non-dominant companies with market power) or cannot 
address in the most effective manner (e.g. parallel leveraging strategies by dominant companies into 
multiple adjacent markets)”.  

It is not obvious what the European Commission means by monopolisation strategies by non-dominant 
companies with market power – traditional competition law analysis would indicate that such strategies 
would be doomed to failure, and if the concerns relate to digital platforms, we refer to our comments in 
Section E below. Moreover, also from a competition law perspective, it is a legitimate interest of a non-
dominant company to strive to attract as many customers as possible and thus to become dominant. 
Parallel leveraging strategies by dominant companies into multiple adjacent markets also appear to be 
primarily a concern relating to very large, dominant digital platforms.  

The reason for, and the focus of, the current discussions and suggested changes to EU competition law 
are certain behaviors of very few, very large and dominant companies, that all have direct relations to 
consumers. This is a very specific area – best dealt with under the current 102 TEUF tool box - and the 
issues arising in this setting cannot readily be transferred to other scenarios, and in particular not to the 
B2B  scenario  where  customers  are  significantly  more  sensitive  about  their  data,  often  insisting  on 
retaining control over their data and have considerable countervailing bargaining power. 

New  digital  business  models  and  platform  solutions  are  continuing  to  emerge  in  Europe,  and  this 
innovation and development should not be limited by restrictive regulations. The introduction of a NCT 
instrument  would  create  a  lot  of  legal  uncertainty  and  likely  lead  to  a  limitation  of  development  and 
innovation, in particular if highly innovative companies could later be “punished” for their success via 
such  NCT  instrument.  This  would  be  counterproductive  for  competition  and  thus  for  customers’ 

 
 
opportunity  to  receive  the  best  and  most  innovative  products.  In  addition,  it  would  further  impede 
European  platforms  from  closing  the  gap  to  their  big  US  and  Asian  incumbents  which  do  not  face 
similarly strict regulations in their home markets thus hampering the desired level playing field which is 
so important for the competitiveness of European players. 

Taking  into  account  the very dynamic environment  and development  in the area of platforms,  it  is in 
addition very likely that the NCT instrument cannot be defined specifically enough to ensure that it will 
only apply to „very large online platforms”. Thus, there will likely be spill-over effects to smaller players 
and emerging innovators and to traditional industries. The example of the market investigation tool in 
the UK and recent comments from Commissioner Vestager show that the application of such tools will 
hardly be limited in practice to the very large, dominant digital players but to all sort of companies. This 
is also shown by the Commission’s quote mentioned above. 

Therefore, the introduction of the NCT instrument bears the inherent risk of creating legal uncertainty 
and  causing  unwanted  side-  and  spillover  effects  which  could  have  a  chilling  effect  on  the 
competitiveness of European companies.     

Furthermore,  we  believe  it  is  important  that  the  NCT  instrument  should  not  be  used  to  lessen  the 
procedural  or  evidential  burden  that  the  European  Commission  is  subject  to  in  proceedings  under 
Articles 101 and 102 TFEU. We note with concern that the European Commission seems to suggest 
that the upside of the introduction of the NCT instrument would be to deal with some of the “problems” 
in traditional competition law enforcement: “The Commission would continue to enforce Articles 101 and 
102 TFEU on a case-by-case basis against anti-competitive conduct of individual companies. It would 
also  continue to conduct  sector inquiries,  which, however,  only empower the Commission  to  request 
information  necessary  for  giving  effect  to  Articles  101  and  102  TFEU  and  also  do  not  allow  the 
Commission to impose remedies outside the scope of individual infringement proceedings.” We would 
consider that the above-mentioned situation is not a “problem” to be dealt with by the introduction of a 
new instrument with extensive remedy powers without the need to show illegal conduct, but rather the 
reflection of the rule of law as it applies to EU competition law enforcement.  

Finally, it is important to note that, despite comparisons being drawn between the NCT instrument and 
e.g. the UK market investigation regime, we are not aware of any jurisdictions that have both ex ante 
(mandatory merger control) and ex post (e.g. Article 102 TFEU) enforcement of competition law and an 
NCT-type tool. Therefore, any attempt to justify the NCT instrument as reflecting similar instruments at 
national level is not accurate.    

E)  If at all, any additional tool beyond Art 102 needs to be very limited 

If  despite  the  lack  of  a  regulatory  gap  as  well  as  a  legal  basis  and  the  potential  negative  impact  on 
business, innovation and market growth the European Commission still wishes to address the above-
mentioned root cause of the concern, namely very large digital platforms, a very cautious and careful 
approach is key. 

In our view it would be more appropriate to deal with these through the existing  Art. 102 TFEU. If an 
additional instrument was to be introduced at all, it should be very limited in its application. 

Either, the European Commission should consider following the German model of § 19a GWB-E (draft) 
and introduce specific rules for companies of paramount significance across markets. As in the German 
model, such additional rules should only apply to a company if the European Commission previously 
stated via a formal decision that the relevant company is such a “company of paramount significance 
across markets”. In addition, any such specific rules should be clearly defined and limited as much as 
possible. This would help to create legal certainty for the affected companies.   

An  alternative  could  be  an  ex  ante  regulatory  instrument  focused  on  and  tailored  only  to  very  large, 
dominant  digital  platforms.  This  means  that  the  scope  of  application  of  such  regulatory  instruments 
should be clearly and narrowly defined to very large, dominant digital platforms with significant market 
power only. In addition, if such ex ante regulations were to be introduced at all, they should in any case 
be strictly limited to platforms with a strong focus on B2C relationships and therefore mere B2B platforms 
or industry platforms should in any case be exempted from such regulations. If one wants to opt for this 
path, we view the European Commission’s Digital Services Act Package and related activities to be the 

 
 
proper (and only appropriate) forum. Please see also our attached submission in relation to the Digital 
Services  Act  package  –  ex  ante  regulatory  instrument  of  very  large  online  platforms  acting  as 
gatekeepers.  

8 September 2020  

 
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annex 

Response to European Commission Open Public Consultation 

Digital Services Act package – ex ante regulatory instrument of very large online platforms 
acting as gatekeepers  

We welcome the opportunity to provide feedback to the European Commission’s (“EC”) Open Public 
Consultation on the proposed Digital Services Act package – ex ante regulatory instrument of very large 
online platforms acting as gatekeepers.  

A)  EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 

We do not believe that there is a need for an ex ante regulatory instrument to ensure fair and competitive 
markets with a view to delivering lower prices and higher quality, as well as more choice and innovation 
to  European  consumers,  because  the  existing  instruments  in  the  European  Commission’s  toolbox 
(enforcement of Articles 101 and 102 TFEU) are sufficient for this purpose. If at all, a smarter and more 
efficient application of the existing tools is required.  

Any ex ante regulation bears the inherent risk of creating legal uncertainty and causing unwanted side 
and  spill-over  effects  which  could  have  a  chilling  effect  on  the  digital  efforts  and  competitiveness  of 
European companies.  

In  case the introduction  of  such ex ante regulations  is  considered  nevertheless,  a very  cautious and 
careful approach is key. A clear distinction between B2C- and B2B-relationships must be included. Any 
ex ante regulations must be strictly limited to platforms with a strong focus on B2C relationships and 
therefore  mere  B2B  platforms  or  industry  platforms  must  in  any  case  be  exempted  from  such 
regulations. Moreover, ex ante regulations should be clearly defined and tailored as much as possible 
to very large, dominant  online platforms with gatekeeper function in order to be  proportionate, to not 
create legal uncertainty and to avoid harmful side and spill-over effects.  

B)  General Comments 

The high-level goals of the EC’s intended proposal for a new Digital Services Act are “to reinforce the 
internal  market  for  digital  services,  to  lay  down  clearer,  more  stringent,  harmonised  rules  for  their 
responsibilities in order to  increase citizen’s safety online and protect their fundamental rights, whilst 
strengthening  the  effective  functioning  of  the  internal  market  to  promote  innovation,  growth  and 
competitiveness, particularly of European digital innovators, scale-ups, SMEs and new entrants.” While 
many of these goals are generally to be welcomed, it is noteworthy that very different aspects (some 
rather  content-focused,  others  more  directed  towards  consumer  protection  and  others  towards  the 
functioning of the market) are brought together in this Digital Services Act. 

Considering the fast developing and growing digital business, we support the EC’s intention to update 
the current legal framework in the B2C area, especially the E-Commerce Directive (issued almost 20 
years  ago).  There  is  a  need  for  clear  and  proportionate  rules  to  create  safe  and  sustainable  digital 
environments  for  consumers  who  usually  lack  the  necessary  information  and  choices  to  take  an 
informed “consent” decision.  

For  example,  consumers  should  be  able  to  refuse  the  use  of  e.g.  cookies  without  experiencing  any 
disadvantages regarding the use of services. Consumers’ rights to delete  online footprints should be 
strengthened. Furthermore, platforms should more efficiently tackle illegal content. 

However, in our  main  theses set  out below,  we will  focus exclusively  on  the  proposed  ex ante rules 
aimed at ensuring that markets characterised by large platforms with significant network effects acting 
as gatekeepers, remain fair and contestable for innovators, businesses, and new market entrants. 

 
 
 
 
C)  Main theses 

1.  No gap in current EU competition rules 

  Considering the immense impact that the suggested changes will have on EU competition law 
and policy and for companies affected by these rules, the most important question should be 
whether there is really a need to complement competition law enforcement through ex ante 
regulations.  

  Generally, we do not see a necessity for an ex ante regulation of very large online platforms 
at this point in time (neither on EU level nor on national level) apart from the abovementioned 
consumer  protection  amendments  to  the  existing  E-Commerce  Directive.  The  currently 
existing  tools  (enforcement  of  Articles  101  and  102  TFEU)  are  sufficient  to  tackle  abusive 
practices of very large online platforms. Complaints and the sense of an underenforcement 
against large technology companies are not so much related to the available tools but rather 
to the lengthy proceedings.  

  The  description  of  the  “critical”  platforms  included  in  the  summary  of  the  initiative  is  the 
following:  “A  few  very  large  online  platforms  account  for  a  very  large  share  of  the  digital 
economy  in  the  EU.  Their  role  as  gatekeepers  between  businesses  and  consumers,  with 
economic power and control over entire platform ecosystems, makes it all but impossible for 
rivals or new market entrants to compete.” This shows that the measures should be targeted 
at dominant or even very large, dominant companies to which – without any doubt - the current 
tools in Art. 102 TFEU could be applied. Therefore, the current toolkit is sufficient. For example, 
if “gatekeepers” abuse their power (e.g. via unfair commercial platform-to-business practices 
including  in  the  view  of  the  EC  self-preferencing,  data  leveraging  and  distortion  of  fair 
competition and fair-trading conditions within online  platform ecosystems) we regard Article 
102 TFEU as an appropriate tool to discipline such behavior. 

 

In addition, it seems to be early for such a massive intervention as the underlying legal and 
economic  questions  are  still  very  controversial  and  by  far  not  mature  enough.  Also,  some 
member states, e.g. Germany, are in the process of significantly extending the scope of their 
dominance legislation to adapt them to the digital world.  It would be  wise for the  European 
legislator to wait for the first results from these national “experiments” before acting.  

2.  An ex ante regulatory instrument will not solve the problem but create more problems 

  The  reason  for,  and  the  focus  of,  the  current  discussions  and  suggested  changes  to  EU 
competition law are certain behaviors of very few, very large and powerful companies, that all 
have  direct  relations  to  consumers. This is  a  very specific area –  best dealt with under the 
current 102 TEUF tool box - and the issues arising in this setting cannot readily be transferred 
to other scenarios, and in particular not to the B2B scenario.  

  Any “ex-ante” intervention in markets (even via a broad list of restrictive Dos and Don’ts) could 
have a significantly negative impact on companies (e.g. slowing down innovation, giving wrong 
incentives and make so-called “free-riding” more attractive).   

  New digital business models and platform solutions are continuing to emerge in Europe, and 
this  innovation  and  development  should  not  be  limited  by  restrictive  regulations.  The 
introduction of ex ante regulations in this area would create a lot of legal uncertainty and likely 
lead to a limitation of development and innovation, in particular if highly innovative companies 
could  later  be  “punished”  for  their  success  due  to  these  regulations.  This  would  be 
counterproductive for competition and thus for customers’ opportunity to receive the best and 
most innovative products.  

  Taking into account the very dynamic environment and development in the area of platforms, 
it is very likely that the suggested ex ante regulations cannot be defined specifically enough to 
ensure that they will only apply to „very large online platforms”. Thus, there will likely be spill-
over  effects  to  smaller  players  and  emerging  innovators  and  to  traditional  industries.  The 
example of the market investigation tool in the UK and recent comments from Commissioner 
Vestager show that the application of such tools will hardly be limited in practice to the very 
large, dominant digital players but to all sort of companies.  

 
 
 
 
 

 

 

In this context one should also bear in mind that there are many platform providers which do 
not have a significant market share and which operate in a way that neither has a negative 
impact on the market nor raises any other concerns and which might nevertheless be affected 
by  the  suggested  ex  ante  regulations.  At  least  in  relation  to  such  platform  providers,  the 
introduction  of  ex  ante  regulations  would  be  disproportionate.  This  applies  all  the  more  for 
other traditional industries. 

In addition, such ex ante regulations might further impede European platforms from closing 
the gap to their big US and Asian incumbents which do not face similarly strict regulations in 
their  home  markets.  This  would  be  hampering  the  desired  level  playing  field  which  is  so 
important for the competitiveness of European players. 

In addition, it is very questionable whether the suggested ex ante regulation could really lead 
to the changes intended by these regulations. Many customers of the “very large platforms” 
are satisfied with the services and possibilities these platforms offer. Therefore, they will often 
have  no  intention  to  switch  to  other  platform  providers  unless  those  other  platforms  offer 
innovative  features  that  distinguish  them  from  existing  platforms.  It  is  unlikely  that  ex  ante 
regulations would have any impact on customer preferences and loyalty. 

  A new legal framework would face several problems: 

  First – even stated by Commissioner Vestager – the term “gatekeeper” is tremendously 
tricky  to  define.  If  the  term  is  defined  too  widely,  it  will  hinder  new  entrants  as  well  as 
smaller players from innovating and growing. 

  Secondly,  how  should  a  process  be  designed  to  implement  measures  against 
gatekeepers  efficiently.  It  goes  without  saying  that  the  respective  players  should  have 
rights to defend and argue against any kind of ex-ante regulations.  

  Thirdly, even a generally  applicable  list of Dos  and  Don’ts  needs to  be  very clear and 
understandable to avoid legal uncertainty (e.g. scope and extent of measures). However, 
digital  business  and  “connected  market  disruption”  are  usually  case-specific,  so  that  a 
generic list of Dos and Don’ts would most likely not be of much help. 

3.  Minimum safeguards for potential ex ante regulatory effort 

 

If despite the lack of a regulatory gap and the potential negative impact on business, innovation 
and market growth, such an ex ante regulation was introduced nevertheless, several important 
factors need to be considered in the drafting of such ex ante regulation: 

  Any regulation should be drafted very carefully and in a light-touch manner. It should be as 
clearly defined and as limited as possible in order to catch only specific behavior of very large, 
dominant digital companies and to ensure legal certainty.  

  The definition of very large online platforms must at least be made in a very narrow, clear and 
distinct way. It must ensure that the application of potential ex ante regulations is limited to 
very  large,  dominant  online  platforms  with  gatekeeper  function  in  order  to  avoid  legal 
uncertainty and harmful side and spill-over effects. If IoT platforms in B2B-relationships qualify 
as very large online platforms subject to ex ante regulation (which even though a significant 
number  of  machines are  connected to them,  may  still have  a negligible market  share),  this 
would have no justification from a competition point of view. 

  A clear distinction between B2C- and B2B-relationships should be included. B2C relationships 
function  very  differently  from  relationships  in  the  B2B  field.  For  B2B,  customers  are 
significantly more sensitive about their data, often insisting on retaining control over their data 
and  such  customers  have  considerable  countervailing  bargaining  power.  Therefore,  the 
application of potential ex ante regulations must be strictly limited to platforms with a strong 
focus on B2C relationships. Mere B2B platforms and industry platforms must in any case be 
exempted from such ex ante regulations. 

 

It is unclear what ex ante regulation would mean in practice. Would “only” certain practices be 
blacklisted for very large online platforms, or could that new flexible framework amount to full 
blown ex ante regulation as e.g. in the telecoms sector, where also the prices charged to the 
other market participants, particularly competitors seeking access, are subject to regulation? 
We do not see any justification for such an extensive framework, since data is duplicable, the 
relevant  infrastructure  is  freely  accessible  and  there  are  no  natural  monopolies  as  in  the 
telecoms sector. 

 
 
  Even dominant companies should generally be able to treat their own services differently in 

comparison to third party services. 

  Particularly with regard to the very large, dominant online platforms which are in the focus of 
the  current  discussions  one  needs  to  bear  in  mind  that  data  is  generally  replicable  and  is 
provided by users voluntarily and free of charge. 

  Any obligation to grant access to (machine) data would cause a chilling effect on innovation 
and investments and foster anticompetitive free-riding. This is not the case with data which is 
generated by public authorities and therefore could be shared.  

  Requirements regarding data portability must acknowledge that the pure format in which data 
(e.g. machine data in the B2B relationship) is collected may already reveal business secrets 
and relevant IP or know how. In addition, no obligation to edit data in a specific format at the 
will of the requesting party must be imposed. 

8 September 2020  

 
 
 
 
 
 
