Ref. Ares(2020)4674696 - 08/09/2020

Committed to Europe 

Orange views on the New Competition Tool and platform regulation 
proposal under the Digital Services Package 

Executive summary 

With  our  economy  and  society  moving  to  digital  and  with  the  COVID  crisis  accelerating  this  trend,  it  is 
essential  to  ensure  that  the  online  world  remains  competitive  and  contestable.  Online  platforms  have 
contributed  positively  to  our  society  by  offering  goods  and  services  in  a  convenient  way  that  appeals 
significantly to consumers while also facilitating businesses’ access to global markets.  

However, the gatekeeper role that some large online  platforms have acquired over the last +10 years has 
also  led  to  certain  substantial  concerns,  to  the  detriment  of  the  European  Union  innovation  and 
competitiveness,  as  well  as  consumers’  choice.  Those  issues  have  been  at  the  heart  of  the  European 
Commission  and  National  Competition  Authorities’  actions  over  the  last  years  with  several  decisions 
tackling  abusive  behaviours  of global  digital  players.  Though  those  decisions  have  shown  that  the 
authorities  can  intervene  and  sanction  certain  illegal  practices ex post,  they  have  also  demonstrated  that 
competition enforcement may be challenging in a fast-moving digital economy.  

Against this background, Orange considers that competition law is overall "fit for purpose" and there is no 
need to fundamentally modify it. However, to ensure fair competition within the online world, it is necessary 
to improve the current framework and develop new targeted intervention tools to efficiently tackle structural 
competition problems exerted by large digital platforms acting as gatekeepers. 

To avoid regulatory overreach and legal uncertainty, Orange suggests the following approach: 

  Clearly defining the issues at stake and the scope of the new targeted intervention – focusing solely on 

large digital platforms acting as gatekeepers 

  Avoiding  disproportionate  actions  such  as  the  various  options  suggested  under  the  Inception  Impact 

 

Assessment on the New Competition Tool 
Implementing  an  ex ante  regulation  through  a  list  of  prohibited  practices  for  large  digital  platforms 
acting as gatekeepers, enforced at European level 

  Allowing a targeted intervention to impose tailor-made remedies (without establishing an infringement) 
to  resolve  identified  structural  competition  problems  exerted  by  large  digital  platforms  acting  as 
gatekeepers, through an extension of the European Commission, DG Competition, powers. 

In details 

A.  The issues at stake and the scope of the intervention should be clearly defined for any 

new intervention to remain proportionate and justified  

Structural competition problems encountered in the digital economy  

Structural  competition  problems  may  arise  in  markets  where  large  digital  platforms  operate  and  such 
concerns are due to the combination of different distinctive features of these actors providing a competitive 
advantage, impossible to replicate.  

Structural  competition  problems  allow  the  emergence  of  ecosystems  and  gatekeeper  scenarios  and  may 
result  in  market  tipping  and/or  monopolization.  In  these  situations,  the  platform  position  becomes 
incontestable, while existing actors are eliminated or marginalized and significant entry barriers are created 

 September 2020  

 
 
 
discouraging  any  new  entry.  Also,  structural  competition  concerns  facilitate  customer  lock-in  within  an 
ecosystem  resulting  in  a  possibly  abusive  use  of  customer  data  and  customers’  extensive  exposure  to 
advertising and may in fine impact innovation and customer choice. 

Structural  competition  problems  concern  practices  such  as  tying/bundling,  leveraging  power  from  one 
market to another, imposing unfair business terms due to bargaining power imbalances,  imposing "take it 
or  leave  it"  conditions  through  retaliation  measures,  self-preferencing  and  discrimination,  priority 
placements/pre-installation  of  applications,  default  settings  distorting  purchasing  decisions,  imposing de 
facto standards and abusive conditions on IP policy, creating obstacles for interoperability and for solutions 
allowing  a  sufficient  level  of  open  sources/APIs,  imposing  proprietary  services,  restricting/discriminating 
access to inputs critical to compete, etc. 

Structural competition problems are due to specific features of some large digital platforms  

When assessing a need for intervention, it is of utmost importance to clearly define the scope. On one side, 
the  definition  of  large  digital  platforms  acting  as  gatekeepers  should  capture  activities  such  as  operating 
systems, search/voice assistants, marketplaces/application stores, online advertising, content sharing and 
cloud services. Also, promising markets for the future should be looked at such as health, home security, 
entertainment,  augmented  reality,  voice  and  image  recognition,  gaming,  online  payment,  identity 
authentication, IoT and other products and services based on machine learning and artificial intelligence. 

On the other side,  the definition  should regroup the features specific to large digital platforms, and target 
only those acting as gatekeepers. 

Orange therefore proposes to define a large digital platform acting as a gatekeeper as a company operating 
a structural digital platform and fulfilling the three following mandatory cumulative criteria: 
  Plays an unavoidable trading partner role by controlling the access to markets, services/inputs and/or 
users,  or  by  significantly  affecting  the  functioning  of  markets  where  it  operates  through  exercise  of 
influence on third parties’ business activities 

  Benefits from direct and indirect network effects through control of large user data base  
  Has  reached  a  critical  scale  which  is  not  reasonably  possible  to  replicate  or  challenge  (based  on 

conglomerate footprint, data, customer base but not only) 

Those mandatory criteria could be analyzed using this non limitative list of characteristics: 
  Benefits  from  strong  economies  of  scale  and  scope  due  to  low  marginal  costs,  scale  of  data  and 

network effects 

  Majority of clients are single-homing 
 
  Has  access  to  large  amount  of  important  data  difficult  to  access  or  replicate  within  a  reasonable 

Is integrated in an ecosystem which is maintained and reinforced through leveraging 

timeframe 
If online advertising is directly or indirectly related to the platform, market shares in this market are high  

 
  The company’s financial value is high and/or has a strong financial capacity 
  Third parties depend on the platform for their activity  
  Business model is based on collecting, processing, editing and further monetizing data 
 
  Has powerful negotiation position creating bargaining power imbalances 
  Consumer decision making is limited due to imposed default settings and conditions 
  Competes with its own business users to supply via its platform 
 

Is free of charge for consumers but monetized otherwise (advertising, data, etc.) 

Is bi/multi-sided 

2 

 
 
 
 
 
B.  There is no need to revolutionize competition law but some adaptations are required to 

"make it fit" for the digital economy 

The current competition law framework remains relevant with some adjustments  

Even  though  competition  law  has  proven  to  be  flexible  to  properly  address  different  situations  over 
decades, it now needs to evolve to be adapted to the specificities of the digital economy so as to efficiently 
and in a timely manner tackle competition problems proper to large digital platforms acting as gatekeepers. 

In  this  context,  Orange  welcomes  the  European  Commission’s  initiatives  to  review  the  Guidelines  on 
Horizontal  Agreements  and  Vertical  Restraints  as  well  as  Notice  on  Market  Definition.  In  addition,  the 
Guidelines on Non-Horizontal Merger and the Communication on the Commission’s Enforcement Priorities 
in  Applying  Article  102  TFEU  should  be  updated.  Also,  the  Commission  should  develop  new  theories  of 
harm adapting them to the digital platform economy and use existing tools, such as interim measures more 
efficiently.  

However,  Orange  acknowledges  that  the  review  of  the  competition  framework  has  its  limits  and  all  the 
aforementioned  structural  competition  problems  might  not  be  possible  to  tackle  under  the  existing  tools. 
Indeed, in the digital economy it can be quite challenging to define markets and assess dominance, as large 
digital platforms have distinctive features, are often present across diverse markets and are integrated in an 
ecosystem linked through common inputs (data, customer base, technical modules, etc.).  

This could call for a need to adopt a new intervention instrument targeting the enforcement gaps, meaning 
the challenge of applying the competition law designed for "traditional" markets to the digital economy and 
to structural competition problems deriving from large digital platforms.  

The New Competition Tool (NCT) proposal would be a significant and disproportionate shift in the 
competition law doctrine  

Any  fundamental  change  to  competition  law  as  suggested  in  the  NCT  Inception  Impact  Assessment  (IIA) 
would be a disproportionate and inappropriate reaction to identified structural competition concerns with a 
risk to modify the burden of proof, procedural safeguards and even render existing tools redundant. It also 
risks creating legal uncertainty and regulatory overreach across sectors. In addition, it could be questioned 
whether Articles 103 and 114 TFEU provide an adequate legal basis for such a tool.  

More  specifically,  the  proposal  targets  not  only  large  digital  platforms  to  which  structural  competition 
problems relate but includes other situations – including oligopolistic markets - without a solid justification 
as to the inefficiency of the existing tools for such cases. Indeed, oligopolistic markets are not problematic 
per se  as  they  do  not  result  in  inefficient  market  outcomes  by  default.  Potential  competition  concerns 
related  to  oligopolistic  markets  are  not  new  and  are  efficiently  addressed  under  the  current  framework. 
Also,  oligopolistic  markets  do  not  create  structural  competition  problems  such  as  monopolization, 
gatekeeping or tipping and they do not have most of the features defining large digital platforms. 

Furthermore, the proposal puts into question the dominance test which is key in a competition assessment 
and has only failed for market situations with large digital platforms due to the specificities of these actors.  

Additionally, introducing a new tool, with such a large intervention scope, risks sending a negative message 
to the whole industry as well as impacting EU competitiveness at global level.  

Finally,  such  a  tool  is  redundant  with  Option  3b  as  suggested  in  the  IIA  on  the  DSA.  Even  though  the 
proposed  competition  tool  aims  at  having  a  larger  reach,  the  primary  intervention  scope  of  both  tools 
remains the digital economy and platforms through similar intervention mechanisms. 

Therefore,  Orange  does  not  support  the  introduction  of  a  New  Competition  Tool  based  on  the  policy 
options proposed in the IIA. 

3 

 
C.  Addressing the gaps related to large digital platforms acting as gatekeepers calls for a 

targeted intervention  

Orange  believes  that  a  proportionate  and  efficient  set  of  measures  to  tackle  structural  competition 
problems  deriving  from  large  digital  platforms  acting  as  gatekeepers  could  be  based  on  the  following 
approach. Such an approach would ensure a smooth interplay between different measures proposed under 
the NCT and DSA packages as well as consistent and non-contradictory outcomes.  

An ex-ante regulation through a list of prohibited practices 

Orange believes that an ex ante tool should be introduced through a list of prohibited practices applied to 
large digital platforms acting as gatekeepers.  Such an ex ante regulation would clarify the rules applied to 
large digital  platforms and forbid certain  practices which could be  problematic per se when employed by 
such actors. This tool, corresponding to Option 3a  of the IIA on the DSA, would be enforced at European 
level.  

Such  a  list  of  prohibited  practices  could  include  self-preferencing,  pre-installation  of  applications  and 
priority  screen  placements,  discriminatory  access  to  platform  components,  imposition  of  default  settings, 
de facto standards or restrictions on IPR policy, etc. In these cases, the burden of proof would be inversed 
and the conduct would be forbidden per se unless the large digital platform could prove the contrary.  

A targeted intervention tool to impose remedies through an extension of DG Competition powers 

As a necessary complement to competition law enforcement and to the list of prohibited practices, a more 
adapted  intervention  tool  targeted  to  structural  competition  problems  exerted  by  large  digital  platforms 
acting  as  gatekeepers  could  be  introduced.  This  tool  (corresponding  to  Option  3b  of  the  IIA  on  the  DSA) 
should  include  a  case-by-case  assessment  related  to  competition  problems  deriving  from  large  digital 
platforms  acting  as  gatekeepers  and  an  imposition  of  tailor-made  remedies,  when  necessary.  Under  this 
new intervention, no infringement would  be established and no fines would  be imposed. To guarantee an 
overall coherence with the competition doctrine when tackling competition problems proper to large digital 
platforms, this tool should be introduced through an extension of DG Competition powers. 

Possible remedies could refer to imposing neutrality between OS/software and platform services, imposing 
interoperability  (negotiations  based  on  fair  terms,  unified/open  APIs  and  open  sources,  personal  data 
portability,  etc.),  forbidding  unfair  business  practices  (tying/bundling,  exclusivities,  MFN,  abusive  or 
unilateral "take it or leave it" conditions, etc.), forbidding leveraging of data/customer base if not replicable 
and certain practices of third party data accumulation, etc.  

This new tool should be applied in exceptional and sufficiently justified situations where Article 102 TFUE is 
proven  not  to  be  efficient  to  tackle  the  competition  concern  in  question.  There  should  thus  be  strict 
limitations, clear definitions for the intervention scope and conditions.  

Orange  would  only  support  the  introduction  of  such  a  tool  (corresponding  to  Option  3b  of  the  IIA  on  the 
DSA) through an institutional set-up with DG Competition empowerment.  

For more information: www.orange.com/committedtoeurope, or follow us on Twitter: @Orange_Brussels 

4 

 
 
