New Competition Tool 

Position Paper 

Mediaset S.p.A. 

Introduction 

Mediaset would welcome the introduction of new, flexible instruments to address the competition 

issues  raised  by  digital  platforms  and  data-driven  business  models.  While  we  acknowledge  the 

opportunities and benefits offered by digitalisation, both for businesses and for consumers, digital 

markets  present  certain  features  that  make  them  prone  to  the  emergence  and  persistence  of 

market  power.  Network  effects  and  a  tendency  to  single-home,  especially  on  the  user  side  of 

platforms, contrive to make many digital markets susceptible to monopolization; data has emerged 

as an asset that provides an unmatchable competitive advantage to those that hold it; control over 

large user bases makes certain digital platforms indispensable trading partners for business users; 

further,  digital  companies  often  operate  both  as  platforms  enabling  business  users  to  reach 

consumers and as a business user in direct competition with other business users, which provides 

an incentive for discrimination and self-preferencing. So far, the existing competition law framework 

and the enforcement of competition rules by the European Commission and national competition 

authorities have proven to be somewhat ineffective in facing these challenges. Regulation of digital 

platforms and the introduction of a new competition tool could represent a significant step towards 

restoring healthy competition in digital markets. 

Main competitive concerns 

In our view, there are three main areas of concern to be tackled with the new competition tool. 

First,  the  asymmetry  in  the  applicable  regulatory  provisions  between  companies  that  compete 

against each other for consumers’ attention and advertising revenue: while most digital companies 

operate  free  of  meaningful  regulatory constraint,  broadcasters  such  as Mediaset  face  significant 

restrictions. Second, the ability of existing digital incumbents (e.g. Google, Facebook and Amazon) 

to  leverage  their  market  power  to  enter  new  markets:  the  resulting  prominence  across  several, 

related markets reinforces their existing competitive advantage in a negative feedback loop that 

entrenches their overall position. Third, the gatekeeping role that many digital platforms have come 

1 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to exert: by virtue of the market power they hold, digital platforms are able to dictate unfair terms 

to business users and potentially discriminate among them or against them. Below, we discuss each 

of these issues in more detail. 

Asymmetry in regulatory regimes 

A large number of digital products and services are offered free of charge to consumers and paid 

for with advertising revenues. The business model of many digital companies is to harvest attention 

by means of content or service provision and resell it to advertisers (so called “attention brokers”). 

Attention brokers are essentially platforms operating in multi-sided markets, much like Mediaset, 

whose core business is to provide free to air (FTA) commercial broadcasting as well as digital content 

funded by advertising revenue. Similarly to attention brokers, broadcasters try to capture consumer 

attention and sell that attention to advertisers. 

Traditionally,  when  defining  relevant  markets,  antitrust  authorities  have  considered  online 

advertising and offline advertising  to be clearly distinct. For example, in the  Google/Double Click 

merger, the Commission defined the relevant market as “online advertisement”, arguing that: “the 

widest possible relevant product market considered in the Decision is the overall market for online 

advertising. […]”. On the other hand, in News Corps/BSkyB, the Commission defined a market that 

went no further than TV advertising, ruling out any competitive constraint stemming from online 

advertising.  Yet,  it  is  clear  that  online  advertising  places  a  significant  competitive  constraint  on 

offline advertising: consumers’ attention and advertising budgets are limited and both consumers 

and advertisers have to make choices as to how they allocate their time and spend, respectively, 

across platforms. According to a study by Politecnico di Milano (“Internet Advertising: fruizione su, 

monetizzazione  giù”),  traditional  media  such  as  TV  and  print  jointly  captured  around  80%  of 

advertising revenue in Italy in 2008, whereas online advertising represented 10% of total revenues. 

In 2019, TV and print only accounted for 52% of advertising revenues, whereas online media have 

increased  their  share  to  38%.  That  is,  online  adverting  has  grown  at  the  expense  of  offline 

advertising, clearly signalling the willingness of advertisers to substitute away from offline media to 

increase their expenditure in offline media (as well as the tendency of consumers to spend more 

time online). 

While  broadcasters  and  digital  attention  brokers  clearly  compete  for  consumer  attention  and 

advertising  spend,  they  are  subject  to  considerably  different  regulatory  regimes  that  entail 

2 

 
 
 
 
 
substantial differences in the ability to raise revenue and in the level of operating costs. First, as set 

out  in  Article  1  of  the  revised  EU’s  Audiovisual  Media  Services  Directive  (Directive  2018/1808), 

video-sharing platforms have no editorial responsibility over the content they provide to the general 

public. On the other hand, audio-visual media services providers, i.e. broadcasters and VOD services, 

have  such  responsibility,  meaning  that  their  main  purpose  is  the  provision  of  programmes  that 

inform, entertain, or educate the general public. That is, while video-sharing platforms are free to 

supply  content  merely  based  on the  profit  it  is expected  to  generate,  getting  by with  mere  self-

regulation, broadcasters are not. 

Second,  online  platforms  benefit  from  far  more  lenient  tax  treatments:  their  presence  across 

jurisdictions  and  the  virtual  nature  of  the  services  they  provide  enables  them  to  register  their 

revenues  in  the  countries  where  taxes  are  lower,  minimizing  their  overall  tax  liability.  Online 

platforms often operate with a concerning lack of transparency, refusing to disclose their revenues 

and therefore their accounting information to national authorities, in Italy as well as in the rest of 

the world. That is, online platforms are able to operate with lower costs than broadcasters. 

Third, it is worth recalling that Member States may prescribe ad hoc ex ante remedies. For instance, 

Mediaset was mandated to set up a separate entity for the sale of advertising on DTT (AGCOM’s 

delibera  136/05),  n.  1):  this  regime,  introduced  with  the  aim  of  reining  in  Mediaset’s  potential 

leverage of market power from analogue to digital, was maintained also following the acquisition of 

radio properties by Mediaset and is currently organized as follows: Publitalia ’80 for free TV; Digitalia 

for  pay  TV;  Mediamond  for  web,  radio  and  press.  In  terms  of  infrastructure,  Delibera  n. 

395/10/CONS,  with  reference  to  market  18  of  the  EC’s  relevant  market  Recommendation, 

prescribed that Mediaset’s fully-owned broadcast network operator Elettronica Industriale had to 

reserve 40% of its transmission capacity to third parties independent content providers. Moreover, 

differently from digital attention brokers, Mediaset is subject to stringent caps as to the amount of 

advertising it can include in its TV programming. These provisions raise costs and limit Mediaset’s 

ability to raise revenues. 

Overall, regulatory largesse allowed large online platforms to consolidate unprecedented market 

power  in  the  EU  and  worldwide,  while  broadcasters  are  burdened  with  a  series  of  somewhat 

anachronistic  regulatory  provisions.  Competition  works  best  when  the  playing  field  is  even,  and 

companies  competing  against  one  another  are  subject  to  the  same  set  of  rules.  Instead, 

3 

 
 
 
 
 
asymmetries  in  the  applicable  regulatory  regimes  put  commercial  broadcasters  at  a  significant 

disadvantage. 

Entry in adjacent markets 

The story we have been told time and again by digital incumbents is that any market power they 

enjoy is fleeting, and as such not a reason for concern, as they are subject to disruptive innovations 

that would dislodge them from their leading market position. However, empirical evidence clearly 

shows  that  this  is  not  the  case:  Amazon,  Facebook  and  Google  have  not  only  maintained  their 

leadership in their respective core businesses but have also been able to leverage it to enter and 

effectively monopolize adjacent markets. The resulting prominence across several, related markets 

reinforces their existing competitive advantage in a negative feedback loop that entrenches their 

overall position, which has become virtually unchallengeable. 

For  example,  the  history  of  Google  is  one  of  expansion  into  adjacent  markets  building  on  its 

leadership among horizontal search engines. Google has gone on to provide vertical search services 

(news,  products),  video sharing  services,  email  services,  an operating  system  for  mobile devices, 

several hardware products (smartphones, tablets, laptops, digital media players), social networking 

services  (the  short  lived  Google  Plus)  and  so  on.  Entry  in  these  markets  was  often  fuelled  by 

leveraging  the  customer  base  that  Google  had  gained  in  horizontal  search.  YouTube’s  leading 

position  among  video  sharing  platforms  is  now  being  leveraged  to  enter  and  expand  into  the 

markets for advertising intermediation and for audio streaming services (YouTube music). Almost 

each of these entries into adjacent markets has helped consolidate Google’s overall position: for 

instance, the success of Android ensures that Google is the default search engine for most mobile 

devices,  which  means  that  Google  has  access  to  much  more  data  than  its  actual  and  potential 

competitors. Having exclusive access to this data means that Google can continuously improve its 

product and that Google’s rivals face significant barriers to entry and expansion. Both mechanisms 

strengthen Google’s dominance. 

Gatekeeping and dual role of platforms 

Gatekeeper scenarios are also a source of concern. They occur in two-sided markets when users on 

one side (typically consumers) single-home: the platform they use then becomes the sole means for 

users on the other side (typically business users) to reach them, thus providing the platform with 

significant  market  power.  A  related  scenario  is  one  where  the  gatekeeper  holds  a  dual  role, 

4 

 
 
 
 
 
maintaining the platform and operating as a business user, as this can create the incentive for self-

preferencing:  the  platform  would  likely  make  higher  margins  from  a  sale  made  through  its  own 

seller, rather than through a third-party one, thus creating the incentive for a discrimination that 

would harm competing business users of the platform as well as consumers. 

There are many examples of gatekeeping in digital markets. Facebook and Google are gatekeepers 

in advertising markets: they have nearly exclusive access to their user bases (i.e. there are few, if 

any, alternatives available to advertisers to reach those users) and are thus able to dictate the terms 

in  their  interactions  with  other  players  in  the  advertising  industry,  such  as  advertisers  and 

publishers. Apple and Google are gatekeepers in the markets for mobile apps, representing a gate 

for app developers to be able to reach Android and iOS users. Amazon is a gatekeeper in the e-

commerce sector: there are users who shop exclusively (or nearly so) through Amazon: merchants 

who want to reach them have no choice but to join Amazon’s Marketplace, and accept the terms 

set by Amazon. 

Mediaset  has  direct  experience  on  the  issue  of  gatekeeping.  YouTube  would  be  a  very  valuable 

outlet for Mediaset’s content, considering its unparalleled and nearly exclusive reach on younger 

demographics that are the hardest to reach for a traditional broadcaster. Yet, in its dealings with 

YouTube, Mediaset has experienced that the terms proposed were unfair and that there would be 

no  transparency  as  to  how  YouTube  would  manage  Mediaset’s  content.  Further,  there  is  no 

transparency  as  to  ways  and  the  extent  to  which  Mediaset  content  is  promoted  by  YouTube. 

Mediaset  is  unable to  know how  YouTube’s  internal  search  engine  and  recommendation  system 

work, and the criteria used to determine which content is prioritized. In this regard, it should be 

noted  that  YouTube  would  have  an 

incentive  to  prioritize  user-generated  content  over 

professionally produced content as margins on the former are higher. 

In addition, Mediaset envisages that significant gatekeeping issues will emerge in the audio-visual 

industry. The way that many digital incumbents operate is to leverage their unique access to large 

customer  bases  to  impose  themselves  as  an  unavoidable  layer  of  intermediation  between  that 

customer  base  and business  users  that  wish to reach  it.  As  consumption  of  audio-visual  content 

shifts to the digital environment, broadcasters will no longer have direct access to consumers: digital 

platforms will likely come in to intermediate that relationship. This will then lead to the same issues 

that  have  been  reported  above  with  respect  to  YouTube,  i.e.  unfair  terms  for  monetization  of 

5 

 
 
 
 
 
content,  lack  of  transparency  over  search  and  recommendation  systems,  bundling  with  ad 

intermediation services, exclusive control of consumers’ data. 

More  generally,  content  creators  such  as  Mediaset  are  increasingly  dependent  upon  digital 

platforms  for  the  distribution  of  their  content  and  for  its  monetization.  Digital  platforms  exploit 

content created by third parties, yet by controlling access to customer bases they are able to dictate 

terms to content creators and retain a substantial share of the industry profits while providing what 

is essentially an intermediation service. Indeed, there is a clear imbalance between the roles exerted 

by  content  creators  and  intermediaries  and  the  share  of  profits  that  content  creators  and 

intermediaries are able to gain. The upshot, in the long term, is that incentives for the creation of 

original content will decrease, to the detriment of consumers. 

The new competition tool 

The issues outlined above cannot be fixed through the use of traditional enforcement tools: Article 

101 of the EU Treaty deals with agreements and does not cover these concerns; Article 102 of the 

EU Treaty could in theory be applied to some of the issues we outlined (such as gatekeeping) but 

has  a  number  of  limitations.  Indeed,  Article  102  allows  intervention  to  deal  with  specific 

anticompetitive conducts. However, the competitive concerns that arise in digital markets are of a 

more  systematic  nature,  stemming  from  the 

inherent  characteristics  of  these  markets: 

anticompetitive conducts take advantage of these features but addressing them through traditional 

enforcement tools would not represent an effective and long-lasting solution. Further, building an 

Article  102  case  takes  time:  given  how  dynamic  digital  markets  are,  and  how  fast  prominent 

positions can be gained (also thanks to networks effects), the enforcement of Article 102 is clearly 

an imperfect tool. 

Along with the introduction of appropriate ex ante regulation, the Commission clearly needs a new 

tool  that  enables  it  to  intervene  in  a  more  flexible  and  timely  manner,  preventing  companies’ 

conducts as well as market features from permanently harming competition. While it should not 

entail fines, the new tool should be backed up by full investigative powers: the Commission should 

be able to send requests for information and interview company management and employees (as 

well as impose penalties for non-compliance). Building cases requires collecting information, and 

companies are often the best – if not the only – source of information. Further, the new tool should 

6 

 
 
 
 
 
entail the ability of DG Competition to make recommendations/proposals to policy makers as well 

as impose remedies on companies. 

These powers should of course be balanced by appropriate safeguards. While it would not result in 

an  infringement decision  or  in  the  imposition  of  penalties, the  new  competition tool  could  have 

relevant consequences on companies involved in the investigation, such as the divestiture of assets. 

Companies  investigated  should  have  every  right  to  fully  participate  in  the  proceedings,  access 

relevant documents, express their views and so on, very similarly to what occurs in art. 101 and art. 

102 cases. This should also include the ability to appeal any decision and the right to have a full 

judicial review. Companies that have an interest in the investigation should also have a right to fully 

participate in the proceedings and express their views on issues and remedies (as in art. 101 and 

art. 102 cases). 

Mediaset S.p.A., 8 September 2020 

7 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
