Ref. Ares(2020)4669723 - 08/09/2020

LEVELLING THE PLAYING FIELD 2.0 

FAIRNESS IN COMPETITION POLICY AND MEETING CONSUMER 
DEMAND IN THE NEW RETAIL ERA 

Professor Paul Dobson 

Final Report 

February 2019 

Prepared on behalf of Independent Retail Europe 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
About the author 

Professor Paul Dobson  

Paul Dobson is Professor of Business Strategy and Public Policy at the University of East 
Anglia (UEA) in the UK.  He has held academic positions previously at Loughborough 
University, the University of Nottingham, and the University of St Andrews.  His research 
expertise is in the areas of competitive strategy and competition policy, with publications 
focusing on retail competition, brand and private label competition, supply-chain relations, 
pricing policies and market power.  He also has extensive consulting and advisory 
experience.  He has produced commissioned reports and acted as an adviser for numerous 
competition authorities, international organisations, industry associations and companies on 
a wide range of antitrust and competition issues, including mergers, market investigations, 
vertical relations, and cooperative agreements.  He is a member of the Centre for 
Competition Policy at UEA and an advisory board member of the American Antitrust 
Institute based in Washington DC. 

(https://www.uea.ac.uk/norwich-business-school/people/profile/p-dobson) 

Contact details: 

Professor Paul Dobson 
Norwich Business School 
University of East Anglia 
Norwich NR4 7TJ 
United Kingdom 
Tel: + 44 7951 540059 
E-mail: p.w.dobson@gmail.com 

Acknowledgements 

This report represents independent research undertaken by the author at the request of 
Independent Retail Europe.  The views contained in the report are solely those of the 
author.  The author gratefully acknowledges the support of Independent Retail Europe and 
permitting complete academic freedom with no interference in the design and conduct of 
the study, the writing and structure of the report, and the conclusions and policy 
recommendations contained herein.   

i 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CONTENTS 

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 

1. 

Introduction and Overview 
1.A  Background 
1.B  Objectives of the present study 
1.C  Outline and structure of the report 

2.  Competing in the New Retail Era 

2.A  The New Retail Era 
2.B  Challenges in developing omnichannel retailing  
2.C  Case study: Decentralised Online Model 
2.D  Lessons and insights 

3.  Special Characteristics of Independent Retailer Groups 

3.A  EU competition policy principles 
3.B  Different organisational forms of retail chains in Europe 
3.C  Processes to maintain network uniformity 
3.D   Group unity and identity 
3.E  Policy obstacles to cooperation for independent retailer groups  

Page number 

iii-xi 

1 

10 

24 

4.  Challenges and Policy Concerns for Independent Retailer Groups 

49 

4.A  Independent retailer groups in Europe 
4.B.  Questionnaire study information 
4.C.  Organizational structure and composition of groups 
4.D.  Contractual agreements and arrangements used by groups 
4.E.  Key challenges facing groups 
4.F.  National and EU policy issues 
4.G  Costs and benefits of retailer independence 

5.  Conclusions and Policy Recommendations 

5.A  Need for a level playing field 
5.B  Specific policy measures 

APPENDIX A – Questionnaire sent to associations and independent retailer groups 

APPENDIX B – Results and findings from the questionnaire study 

60 

71 

75 

APPENDIX C – Examples of the development and national policy treatment of independent 

retailer groups 

125 

APPENDIX D – Competition policy towards independent retailer groups 

135-154 

ii 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 

0.1 

0.2 

0.3 

0.4 

The tilted playing field undermining retail competition 
This report, prepared at the request of Independent Retail Europe (IRE),1 details the findings 
of  an  economic  study  undertaken  to  examine  the  market  and  policy  developments 
impacting  the  competitiveness  of  independent  retailer  organisations  in  view  of  the  rapid 
changes  taking  place  in  European  retailing  driven  by  retail  technology  and  multichannel 
retailing with accompanying structural changes to retail markets. 

European  retail  markets  are  in  a  delicate  position  where  the  advancing  use  of  retail 
technology  and  the  increasing  reliance  by  consumers  on  online  retailing  pose  a  significant 
risk  to  the  structure  and  competitiveness  of  markets  that  could  quickly  tip  towards  being 
highly concentrated and dominated by technology giants and very large retail players with 
strong omnichannel retail capabilities.  This tippy market challenge is new to retailing, where 
traditionally market structures change slowly depending on the flow of store openings and 
closures.    However,  in  this  New  Retail  era,  retail  growth  or  demise  can  be  sudden  and 
depend fundamentally on the appeal of online operations.   

In such circumstances, small differences in competitive positions can be magnified and there 
has never been a greater need to ensure a level playing field where all retailers are able to 
compete  on  even  terms  and  are  not  competitively  disadvantaged  by  the  way  that 
competition  policy  operates.  Unfortunately,  current  EU  competition  policy  does  not  allow 
for such a level playing field because of the way it risks curtailing the competitive behaviour 
of  independent  retailer  groups,  which  are  an  important  economic  force  across  European 
retail markets helping to ensure that consumers are well served and benefit from effective 
competition.   

In  the  new  retail  era  independent  retailer  groups  will  need  to  operate  more  as  cohesive 
retail  organisations  and  unified  systems  when  competing  directly  with  fully  (vertically  and 
horizontally)  integrated  retailers.    However,  EU  competition  policy  treats  independent 
retailer  groups  -  unless  they  constitute economic  units  -  differently  because  the  individual 
retail  outlet  operations  belonging  to  the  relevant  groups  are  owned  and  controlled  by 
independent SME retail entrepreneurs rather than being centrally owned and managed.  The 
result  is  unfair  and  discriminatory  policy  treatment  that  tilts  the  playing  field  in  favour  of 
integrated retailers and retail technology giants. The effects of the difference in treatment 
are  amplified  in  the  New Retail era where  online  and  omnichannel  retailing  have  come  to 
the fore.  

1    Established  in  1963,  Independent  Retail  Europe  (IRE)  (formerly  UGAL  –  the  Union  of  Groups  of 
Independent  Retailers  of  Europe)  is  the  European  trade  association  that  acts  as  an  umbrella 
organisation  for  independent  retailer  groups  in  all  food  and  non-food  sectors.    Currently,  IRE 
represents  23  groups  and  associations  of  groups  in  Europe  which  in  turn  represent  over  373,000 
independent  retailers  with  a  combined  retail  turnover  of  more  than  €977  billion  and  more  than 
594,000  points  of  sale,  which  in  total  employ  over  6.34  million  people  and  generate  a  wholesale 
turnover of more than €287 billion. (Source: http://www.independentretaileurope.eu/about-us.html). 

iii 

 
 
                                                      
0.5 

0.6 

This  report  demonstrates  the  ways  in which  current  EU  competition  policy  is undermining 
the  ability  of  independent  retailer  groups  to  respond  to  the  market  changes  taking  place. 
There is an urgent need to modify the policy approach to create a level playing field. A level 
playing field is necessary to avoid consumers suffering from diminished choice, service and 
value  and  to  ensure  the  long-term  health  and  vibrancy  of  effective  and  fair  retail 
competition across the EU for the economic and social good.   

Fair  competition  requires  a  level  playing  field.    Ensuring  that  independent  retailer  groups 
have  the  freedom  to  act  as  effective  competitors  in  the  new  retail  era  is  not  about 
protecting  competitors,  but  rather  about  protecting  competition  by  ensuring  a  more  even 
playing field that provides greater opportunity for competition to operate in a manner that 
can best ensure that consumers are well served by retail markets.   

0.7  Action  is  required  now  to  establish  a  level  playing  field  as  the  developing  technological 
revolution unfolds in retailing before competition is irrevocably weakened to the detriment 
of consumers. 

The competitive role of independent retailer groups 

0.8 

0.9 

Independent retailer groups are diverse retail organisations characterised by the provision of 
a support network to independent SME retail entrepreneurs along with joint purchasing of 
goods and services to attain efficiencies and economies of scale.  They function as unified or 
cohesive  systems  in  retail chains  where  the  significant  point  of  difference  from  integrated 
chains is that the  individual retail outlet operations are owned and controlled by separate 
entrepreneur  members  making  decisions  at  the  store  level  rather  than  under  central 
management.  Additionally,  membership  may  be  voluntary,  where  members  can  opt  to 
leave.  It  is  this  ownership/control/membership  difference  that  lies  at  the  heart  of  the 
discrepancy in competition law treatment as compared with vertically integrated groups.  

Independent retailer groups can avoid discriminatory treatment and the problems set out in 
this  report  when  their  competent  national  competition  authority  recognises  them  as 
constituting  as  a  single  economic  entity  (“economic  unit”),  which  applies  to  some  groups, 
but this perspective varies across EU Member States and has not been resolved in respect of 
EU  policy.  Thus  different  independent  retailer  groups  can  receive  different  treatment 
depending not just on how they are organised but where they operate in the EU.  

0.10  These policy issues are not  new, but  independent  retailer  groups have  existed and been a 
key  part  of  the  fabric  of  European  retail  markets  much  longer  than  the  current  EU 
competition policy framework.  Many of these independent retailer groups have existed for 
nearly  a century or more.  Their common and unifying feature is that retail entrepreneurs 
rather than retail managers lead and run the individual store operations and that the stores 
in the group tend to be independently rather than centrally owned.  

0.11  Despite  policy  restrictions,  independent  retailer  groups  have  survived  and  prospered  by 
virtue  of  their  special  business  model  which  promotes  an  attractive  retail  proposition  to 
consumers through innovating by encouraging SME entrepreneurship, placing an emphasis 
on local sourcing, and tailoring their operations to their served local markets with a strong 
consumer  focus.    The  business  model  works well  because  it  provides  strong  incentives  for 

iv 

 
 
stores to perform well – where the business risks and rewards lie with the entrepreneur with 
local  control  rather  than  a  salaried  manager  directed  by  central  control  –  and  an 
organisational  structure  that  provides  cost  savings  and  revenue  synergies  through  joint 
purchasing, joint marketing, joint branding and other sharable benefits. 

0.12  Importantly,  the  independent  retailer  organisations  provide  a  cohesive  system  to  support 
their members,  both  to  increase  the  value  of  their  business  and  to  improve  the  economic 
performance  of  their  shops,  as  well  as  actively  involving  them  in  the  development  of  the 
group.    While  the  independent  retailers  may  use  common  branding  and  the  same  retail 
insignia,  they  are  not  mere  franchising  or  dealer  networks.  The  groups  respect  the 
independent character of their members whilst ensuring, in various ways, the participation 
of their members in the direction and management of the group in building and maintaining 
a  cohesive  system.    Additionally,  they  provide  independent  retailers  with  technical  and 
material resources, including all the services and the human capacity required to guarantee 
the continuance and development of flourishing retail businesses: joint purchasing, logistics 
and IT, training, financial services, consultancy, marketing, shop-fitting and advice on trends, 
inter alia.  

0.13  As this report details, the size of these groups can vary from representing a small handful of 
independent  retailers  operating  on  a  regional  basis  through  to  major  retail  organisations 
operating  as  very  familiar  retail  brands  with  several  thousand  retail  members  spanning 
multiple  countries.    Regardless  of  their  size,  the  groups  have  in  common  the  intention  to 
provide  their  independent  SME  retailer  members  with  the  ability  and  wherewithal  to 
compete  effectively  with  large  integrated  retail  chains,  serve  consumers  well  through  the 
retail  service  they  provide,  and,  in  the  process,  ensure  that  retail  markets  remain 
competitive and functioning well to the greater economic and social good. 

Competition policy impeding independent retailer groups 

0.14  To ensure effective retail competition, it is vitally important that competition policy does not 
impede  the  efficiency  and  competitiveness  of  independent  retailer  groups  as  otherwise 
competition  in  retail  markets  where  these  groups  operate  will  suffer.    Unfortunately, 
though,  competition  policy  is  impeding  such  groups  when  they  are  not  viewed  as 
constituting single economic units because it is restricting how these groups organise their 
internal relationships to coordinate their operations in a way that makes optimal use of their 
sharable benefits, notably by  creating uncertainty as to the  legality of their cooperation in 
key  areas  such  as  joint  purchasing,  joint  marketing,  common  pricing,  and  store  chain 
planning and coordination.   

0.15  The  problem  lies  with  EU  competition  policy  failing  to  make  an  appropriate  distinction 
between inter- and intra- group relationships.  Regrettably, the latter are simply treated the 
same as the former  in being viewed as merely contracting relationships between separate 
legal parties, when in fact they are about operations in a unified and cohesive system that 
are integral to the  organisation.  The overlooked point  is that independent retailer groups 
are  organisations,  where  the  parties  involved  in  the  unified/cohesive  system  work  to  the 
same overall ends, having the same values, and wanting the same success for their brand. 
This does not make them integrated single firms (like a corporate retail chain) but still means 

v 

 
 
that the parties in the group function within a broad hybrid organisational structure that is 
fundamentally  different  as  to  how  “external”  trade  works,  between  completely  separate 
organisations.  

0.16  Central  to  the  success  and  ongoing  operation  of  independent  retailer  groups  is  that  they 
develop  group  unity  and  identity.    In  particular,  to  function  effectively  as  an  organisation 
embodying a unified system, the different members and central functions of the group work 
together  to  support  uniformity  and  harmony.    The  group  achieves  this  through  a 
combination  of  (i)  centralised  (top-down)  processes  (as  a  combination  of  contracts, 
incentives  and  persuasion),  (ii)  plural  (mixed  direction)  processes  (involving  solidarity, 
mimesis, and enculturation), and (iii) decentralised (bottom-up or across) processes (relating 
to trust, organisational commitment, and informal control).  These processes are the source 
of  the  efficiency  in  how  these  groups  function  by  cementing  collaboration  and  cohesion 
while  respecting  members’  independence  and  entrepreneurship  in  operational  decision-
making. 

0.17  The deficiency of EU competition policy and the EC policy guidance is that it does not give 
due  recognition  to  independent  retailer  groups  as  organisations  embodying  a  cohesive 
system  and  instead  views  them  as  merely  “associations”.    Thus,  the  starting  principle  in 
policy  assessment  is  that  these  groups  operate  with  a  set  of  horizontal  and/or  vertical 
agreements  that  –  depending  on  content  and  context  –  have  the  ability  to  restrict  and 
thwart  competition  (as  evident  from  the  wording  in  Article  101(1)  TFEU).    Thus,  EU 
competition  policy  does  not  have  a  sufficiently  clear  “third  way”  between  vertically 
integrated  entities  (as  single  economic  entities)  and  cooperation  between  totally 
autonomous  entities.    This  fact  is  at  the  root  of  the  unfair  and  discriminatory  policy 
treatment that independent retailer groups risk receiving. 

0.18  The  unfortunate  result  is  a  blanket  policy  treatment  that,  instead  of  seeing  the  groups  as 
organisations, wrongly views  them as mere market exchange  relationships to be  governed 
by vertical and horizontal agreements policy.  Thus, their “internal” relationships are treated 
as being akin to separate “external” firms trading with other in a supply chain relationship or 
collaborating with each for the purposes of some joint initiative, all of which could be quite 
temporary and certainly not purposefully designed to last indefinitely. 

0.19  The upshot is that independent retailer groups are regulated in their internal relations while 
integrated retailers are free from such regulation in how they organise and coordinate their 
store-chain operations, with the result that EU competition policy gifts integrated retailers a 
competitive advantage.  Thus far, independent retailer groups have managed to cope with 
the resulting disadvantage by relying on the strength of their business model.  However, in 
the  New  Retail  era,  any  competitive  disadvantage  is  greatly  magnified  and  so  restrictions 
arising from present EU competition policy that impede efficiency and competitiveness will 
inevitably exacerbate harm to competition and result in consumer detriment. 

Tippy markets in the New Retail era 

0.20  To appreciate why retail markets are becoming so tippy, it is important to understand how 
technological developments are rapidly changing retailing and the shopping experience for 
consumers.  This transformation, in what is termed the New Retail era,  is characterised by 

vi 

 
 
the move to omnichannel retailing and the promise of full channel management through the 
integration  of  online,  offline,  logistics  and  data  across  a  single  value-chain.  These 
developments  are  set  to  advance  further  as  technology  becomes  completely  integral  to 
modern  retailing,  including  greater  use  of  Big  Data  analytics  and  artificial  intelligence  (AI) 
with  applications  such  as  smart  shelves  interacting  with  shoppers  and  augmented  reality 
displays to enhance the shopping experience and propel sales. 

0.21  These  technological  advances  and  changing  consumer  shopping  habits  are  driving  key 
changes  in  Europe’s  retail  sector,  with  distinct  consequences  for  the  market  structure  as 
different  forms  and  formats  of  retailing  become  more  or  less  popular.    In  particular,  six 
market features stand out as indicative of the major structural changes taking place:  

  Growth  in  online  retailing  –  rapid  for  many  non-food  products  and  developing  for 

internet grocery retailing 

  Growth 

in  multichannel  retailing  –  successful 

integrated  retailers  exploiting 

omnichannel presence 

  Growth in European-wide retailing – especially with the growing international spread 

of discounters with strong pan-European brand identity 

  Decline  of  high  streets  and  city  centres  across  Europe  -  being  undermined  by  the 
prolonged effects of the economic crisis and a shift to online shopping and discount 
retailing with resulting closure and bankruptcy of an array of long-standing retailers 
  Declining need for very large format stores – being undermined by a shift to online 

shopping and discount retailing 

  New  technological  era  –  with  an  arms  race  in  utilising  data  analytics  and  artificial 
intelligence  to  enhance  the  in-store  shopper  experience  and  allow  real-time 
adjustments to the retail offer, including dynamic pricing, to drive retail sales   

0.22  The  New  Retail  era  poses  a  substantial  competitive  challenge  to  specialist  physical  store 
retailers because the New Retail model promotes omnichannel retailing to provide greater 
all-round  convenience  along  with  an  enhanced  shopping  experience  through  applying 
technology and data analytics on customer preferences, shopping habits and buying needs.  
These  developments  make  flexibility  and  agility  the  strategic  imperative  for  retailers  to 
compete, survive and prosper. In this respect, retailers emphasising online sales operations 
have  a  major  advantage  in  that  they  are  significantly  less  encumbered  by  the  heavy 
regulatory burden facing offline retailers operating physical stores.  

0.23  On a global scale, the major retail tech giants, like Amazon, Alibaba, Tencent-JD.com, lead 
the way in this retail revolution, and the major integrated chain-store retailers, like Walmart, 
are striking key partnerships to make sure they have both a strong and coordinated physical 
store  network  and  online  presence  supported  by  accessible  shopping  technology.  
Meanwhile,  other physical  store  retailers are seeking to develop online  operations so that 
they  can  provide  more  convenient  services  to  consumers  through  24/7  shopping,  home 
delivery, ‘click and collect’, and product information supplied via mobile devices and social 
media. 

0.24  In the traditional local retail markets where competition took place only between different 
physical  store  operations,  independent  retailer  groups  have  been  able  to  compete 

vii 

 
 
 
effectively  based  on  their  ability  to  adapt  quickly  to  differences  in  local  competition  and 
demand. Even though they have  been constrained by EU competition law as compared to 
competing integrated chain-store retailers, the  disadvantages have not been impossible to 
overcome. Effective business models have been possible to implement not withstanding EU 
law  precluding  independent  retailer  groups  from  using  practices  such  as  common  pricing 
(insofar as a group has more than one member competing in a local retail market) or resale 
price maintenance (RPM), across their retail members to the benefit of the consumers.   

0.25  However, in the new market environment, the competition policy restrictions within the EU 
threaten  the  independent  retailer  groups’  ability  and  agility  to  extend  their  physical  store 
operations  to  an  effective  and  fully  coordinated  omnichannel  system.    As  a  consequence, 
they  are  lagging  behind  the  technology  giants  and  major  integrated  retailers  in  this 
technological race with implications for the future competitive structure of retailing which is 
likely  to  become  increasingly  concentrated  in  a  winner-takes-all  tippy  market  situation 
where network effects and scale efficiencies dominate. 

Policy  obstacles  restricting  independent  retailer  groups  developing  efficient omnichannel 
operations 

0.26  Independent retailer groups seeking to develop a competitive presence in the online market 
face  legal  obstacles  because  of  how  competition  authorities  interpret  their  ownership 
structure  in  the  context  of  the  prohibition  against  anticompetitive  agreements  in  the  EC 
vertical guidelines and horizontal guidelines. Principally, as interpreted in the EC guidelines, 
Article 101 (1) TFEU  prevents  independent retailer groups  from  using common pricing  and 
other coordination practices open to integrated retailers online.  In the New Retail era, these 
legal  obstacles  serve  to  distort,  restrict  and  prevent  competition  in  favour  of  integrated 
retailers  and  retail  tech  giants  to  a  much  higher  degree  than  before  because  they  are 
essential to an efficient, fully coordinated, data analytic driven multichannel retail system. 

0.27  In  the  absence  of  being  able  to  develop  fully  coordinated  and  integrated  multichannel 
systems,  independent  retailer  groups  face  choosing  between  the  less  efficient  options  for 
developing  online  sales  through  either  a  centralised  or  decentralised  model.    Both  models 
are  limited  in  respect  of  coordination  across  the  store  network  and  the  need  for 
membership  support  while  also  abiding  by  existing  competition  laws  restricting  horizontal 
and vertical agreements. 

0.28  With a centralised model, where all e-commerce is centrally controlled, the group acts as the 
seller  in  direct  contact  with  the  customer.  It  executes  all  functions  associated  with  selling 
(taking  orders,  billing,  receiving  payment,  delivery,  after-sales,  etc.),  and  determines  the 
price and receives all payments, regardless of the customer’s location.  The central operation 
is thereby separate and distinct from individual stores, so online  and offline  prices, ranges 
and services can differ, which can undermine  the group’s brand reputation for consistency 
and cause consumer confusion while raising consumers’ search costs to obtain best value for 
money.  

0.29  With  a  decentralised  model,  each  shop  acts  as  a  seller  for  its  own  website  or  web  page, 
setting and amending prices as it sees fit.  Online customers choose their delivery location 
before examining the offer and placing the order directly with the distributor. Accordingly, 

viii 

 
 
there is no single online price, which again can undermine the group’s brand reputation for 
consistency  and  cause  consumer  confusion  while  raising  consumers’  search  costs.    In 
addition, the consumer faces a less convenient online service, involving more choices, more 
clicks  and  more  time  (because  the  choice  of  local  retailer  has  to  be  selected  first  before 
choosing and ordering goods), compared to the faster and smoother online service offered 
by integrated retailers. 

0.30  In respect of both models, the critical restriction is the inability to coordinate fully the retail 
price  offer  as  a  consistent  and  clear  proposition  to  consumers.    Specifically,  in  comparing 
offers across different retailers, consumers want to be able to search easily for the best price 
and  value,  so  having  a  consistent  and  clear  price  is  critical  to  aiding  the  consumer  search 
process.    Helping  clarify  to  the  consumer  a  single  price  on  offer  helps  the  retailer  secure 
sales  while  also  allowing  for  rapidly  adapting  the  price  to  cater  for  changing  competitive 
circumstance and promoting a consistent price image for the group.  For practical purposes, 
having a common price also helps the group to appear in online search price rankings while 
ensuring that store prices match consumers’ expectations based on the online information, 
again  facilitating  the  consumer’s  search  process.    Price  consistency  is  especially  important 
for  known-value,  highly  promoted,  and  big  selling  items that  heavily  influence  the  group’s 
overall price image. 

0.31  While both types of business model might be workable (at least as long as online and offline 
sales  are  deemed  to  take  place  on  different  relevant  markets),  they  are  unlikely  to  be  as 
coordinated, integrated, efficient, responsive and competitive as that which can be delivered 
by  integrated  retailers.    Permitting  independent  retailer  groups  to  set  common  uniform 
prices for online (and, where necessary, offline) sales would help improve brand consistency 
and  give  consumers  the  assurance  of  obtaining  the  best  price  from  the  store  network.  
Similarly, allowing independent retailer groups to share information on sales and prescribe 
product  ranges  would  help  improve  the  efficiency  of  logistics,  stock  replenishment  and 
supply operations along with assuring local product availability for the benefit of consumers.  

Need for a level playing field (2.0) 

0.32  Even 

if  unintended  by  policymakers,  the  competition  policy  restrictions  affecting 
independent retailer groups are impeding their ability to compete effectively with integrated 
retailers and retail tech giants.   

0.33  In contrast to the restrictions on independent retailer groups, integrated retailers and retail 
tech  giants  are  free  to  set  prices,  product  ranges,  service  levels,  and  share  information 
across  their  entire  retail  operations  in  whatever  manner  they  choose  to  maximise  their 
efficiency and competitiveness.  Instead, an independent retailer group is restricted in these 
aspects  even  if  the  group  serves  as  a  single  coordinated  organisation  or  unified  system 
because  of  the  separate  legal  ownership  of  the  stores  or  the  businesses  run  from  the 
individual stores.  The result is unfair and discriminatory policy treatment in respect of how 
EC  competition  law  rules  are  applied  to  these  independent  retailer  groups  vis-à-vis  the 
liberal approach afforded to integrated retailers and retail tech giants.   

0.34  Echoing my 2007 report on behalf of Independent Retail Europe (then called UGAL) with the 
same finding, but now with greater urgency in view of the advancing New Retail revolution, 

ix 

 
 
there is a pressing policy need to allow independent retailer groups to have similar freedom, 
flexibility and control as afforded to integrated retailers and retail tech giants.  This will allow 
these  groups  to  compete  on  the  same  competitive  footing  as  integrated  retailers  to  the 
considerable  benefit  of  consumers  who  may  otherwise  suffer  from  a  poorer  retail  offer, 
weakened competition, and ultimately diminished retail service and product choice.   

0.35  In this situation, there  are four stand-out  points  about  removing unfair and discriminatory 
policy  treatment  to  promote  efficiency  and  competitiveness  along  with  accepting  the 
necessity of less regulation and reduced legal uncertainty: 

 

Independent retailer groups do not require special treatment and unduly favourable 
policies – they just need equality 

  Groups  just  need  a  level  legal  playing  field  to  allow  them to  compete  on  effective 

terms with other forms of retailers 

  Consumers stand to benefit by establishing a level playing field that helps promote 

and sustain effective competition 

  Action and clarity are required now to ensure consumers benefit from retail choice, 

variety, efficiency and fair competition in the New Retail era 

Conclusions and policy recommendations 

0.36  This report stresses the policy need for a level playing field for different retail business forms 
to  support  effective  competition  and  efficiency  in  the  New  Retail  era  governed  by  a 
technology arms race currently skewed in favour of integrated retailers and retail tech giants 
because  of the  unfair and  discriminatory  policy treatment  hampering independent retailer 
groups.   

0.37  Creating  a  level  playing  field  will  help  ensure  that  independent  retailer  groups  receive  a 
more appropriate legal treatment compared to the current unfair and discriminatory policy 
treatment  they  receive  which  is  impeding  their  efficiency  and  competitiveness  to  the 
detriment of the consumers. 

0.38  Specific policy measures need to be considered which account  for the rapid developments 
happening in retailing and the need to maintain and promote effective competition through 
policy that supports rather than inhibits the efficiency of independent retailer groups. 

0.39  As  a  starting  point,  EC  competition  policy  rules  and  guidance  on  horizontal  and  vertical 
agreements  needs  to  make  an  appropriate  and  clear  distinction  between  inter-  and  intra- 
organisational  relationships  and 
identify  appropriate  treatment  and  clarity  on  the 
competition rules for independent retailer groups.  

0.40  There  are  five  longstanding  issues  over  EC  competition  rules  and  guidance  that  need 
reviewing  and  amending  to  avoid  undermining  the  efficiency  and  competitiveness  of 
independent retailer groups:  

i.  Discriminatory legal treatment in regard to permitted vertical and horizontal control  
ii.  Duration  and  percentage  share  limits  to  pro-competitive  agreements  on  joint 

purchasing and joint marketing 

iii.  Legal  uncertainty  hanging  over  existing 

trading,  supply  and  distribution 

arrangements 

x 

 
 
iv.  Arbitrary  market  share  thresholds  used  in  European  Commission  (EC)  rules  and 

guidance on vertical and horizontal agreements 

v.  Continuing  scepticism  and  distrust  towards  common  pricing  and  resale  price 
maintenance  (RPM)  despite  clear  economic  benefits  in  the  context  of  use  within 
independent retailer groups 

0.41  The  emergence  of  the  New  Retail  era  has  highlighted  three  urgent  matters  where  

independent retailer groups now need clear policy guidance and support: 

I.  Allowing independent retailer groups the freedom to develop centralised online and 
coordinated  multichannel  retail  operations  so  they  can  compete  more  effectively 
with integrated retailers and retail tech giants, which would be aided by allowing: 

(i)  Joint  commercialisation  and  information  sharing  for  efficient  and  effective 

pricing and promotion 

(ii)  Maximum  resale  price  maintenance  to  guarantee  fairness  to  consumers 

through capped prices  

(iii) Common prices where necessary to ensure clarity, consistency and fairness 

in the retail offer to consumers 

II.  Clarifying  rules  surrounding  selective  distribution  to  ensure  that  physical  stores 

remain competitive with online stores and that competition is fair. 

III.  Clarifying the treatment of contractual relationships for independent retailer groups 
to ensure that wholesaler-retailer franchise relationships (as in symbol groups) are 
not subject to franchising rules designed to regulate business-format franchises and 
manufacturer-dealer franchises. 

0.42  The New Retail era promises the consumer the ultimate convenience of shopping flexibility 
to  buy  anything,  anywhere,  anytime.    To  deliver  on  this  promise  requires  very  substantial 
investment  by  retailer  organisations,  ideally  supported  by  an  assurance  that  policymakers 
will regulate the playing field to allow them to compete fairly with each other.   

0.43  From  a  competition  policy  perspective  applicable  to  European  retailing,  there  has  never 
been  a  more  important  time  to  establish  a  level  playing  field  between  different  retail 
business  forms  as  the  retail  technology  revolution  unfolds.    Unless  policy  action  is  taken 
soon  to  level  the  playing  field  then  competition  will  be  further  distorted  in  favour  of  the 
leading integrated retailers and the retail tech giants, inevitably concentrating retail markets 
and reducing consumer choice with independent retailer groups hindered by outmoded and 
flawed policy rules.   

xi 

 
 
 
 
 
Final Report 

Levelling the Playing Field 2.0 

1. INTRODUCTION AND OVERVIEW 

This section sets out the background to the present economic study, explaining the context of 
the rapid changes taking place in European retailing.  The nature and purpose of the report is 
to  assess  the  current  situation  facing  independent  retailer  groups  in  terms  of  how  EU  and 
national policy is affecting their performance and operations, while considering the ways in 
which policy changes might be economically beneficial in increasing efficiency and promoting 
competition to the benefit of consumers. This introductory section outlines how the report is 
organised and structured, the source material used for the empirical findings, and the main 
areas of focus in the report.  

1.A  Background 

1.1 

This report, prepared at the request of Independent Retail Europe (IRE),2 details the findings 

of  an  economic  study  undertaken  to  examine  the  market  and  policy  developments 

impacting the competitiveness of independent retailer groups in view of the rapid changes 

taking place in European retailing in respect of retail technology and multichannel retailing, 

with accompanying structural changes to retail markets.  Maintaining the competitiveness of 

independent  retailer  groups  is  vital  for  ensuring  that  consumers  continue  to  benefit  from 

shopping choices, variety and innovation that can sustain good service, products, prices and 

value for money as the coming technological revolution unfolds. 

1.2 

Independent  retailer  groups  are  retail  organisations  characterised  by  the  provision  of  a 

support  network  to  independent  SME  retail  entrepreneurs  along  with  joint  purchasing  of 

goods and services to attain efficiencies and economies of scale.3  They function as unified or 

cohesive systems in retail chains where the crucial point of difference from integrated chains 

is  that  the  individual  retail  outlet  operations  are  owned  and  controlled  by  separate 

entrepreneur members rather than under central management, with membership, in some 

cases, being voluntary.  It is this ownership/control/membership difference that lies at the 

2    Established  in  1963,  Independent  Retail  Europe  (IRE)  (formerly  UGAL  –  the  Union  of  Groups  of 
Independent  Retailers  of  Europe)  is  the  European  trade  association  that  acts  as  an  umbrella 
organisation  for  independent  retailer  groups  in  all  food  and  non-food  sectors.    Currently,  IRE 
represents  23  groups  and  associations  of  groups  in  Europe  which  in  turn  represent  over  373,000 
independent  retailers  with  a  combined  retail  turnover  of  more  than  €977  billion  and  more  than 
594,000  points  of  sale,  which  in  total  employ  over  6.34  million  people  and  generate  a  wholesale 
turnover of more than €287 billion. (Source: http://www.independentretaileurope.eu/about-us.html). 
3 For a range of examples, boxed illustration C.1 in Appendix C provides summary details of 13 leading 
independent retailer groups operating in different countries and different sectors within the EU. 

1 

 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                      
Final Report 

Levelling the Playing Field 2.0 

heart of the discriminatory and restricting policy treatment that independent retailer groups 

face,  where  the  new  retail  era  and  technology  revolution  is  magnifying  disparities  and 

impeding effective competition in favour of integrated retailers. 

1.3 

The independent retailer organisations provide a cohesive system to support their members, 

both to increase the  value of their business and  to improve  the  economic performance  of 

their shops, as well as actively involving them in the development of the group.  The groups 

respect  the  independent  character  of  their  members  whilst  ensuring,  in  various  ways,  the 

participation  of  their  members  in  the  direction  and  management  of  the  group  in  building 

and  maintaining  a  cohesive  system.    Additionally,  they  provide  independent  retailers  with 

technical and material resources, including all the services and the human capacity required 

to guarantee the development of flourishing retail businesses: joint purchasing, logistics and 

IT,  training,  financial  services,  consultancy,  marketing,  shop-fitting  and  advice  on  trends, 

inter alia. 

1.4  As this report shows, the size of these groups can vary from representing a small handful of 

independent  retailers  operating  on  a  regional  basis  through  to  major  retail  organisations 

with several thousand retail members spanning multiple countries.  Regardless of their size, 

the  groups  have  in  common  the  intention  to  provide  their  independent  SME  retailer 

members with the ability and wherewithal to compete effectively with large integrated retail 

chains,  serve  consumers  well  through  the  retail  service  they  provide,  and,  in  the  process, 

ensure that retail markets remain competitive and functioning well to the greater economic 

and social good. 

1.5 

The market is changing.  Technological developments are altering the nature of retailing and 

impacting  all  types  of  retailer  organisations  –  whether  independent  retailer  groups, 

integrated  retailers,  franchise  systems,  hybrid  organisations  (including  joint  ventures  and 

mixed  organisations)  or  standalone  independent  retailers.    These changes  are  occurring  in 

what is now termed the New Retail era, characterised by the move to omnichannel retailing 

and  the  promise  of  full  channel  management  through  the  integration  of  online,  offline, 

logistics  and  data  across  a  single  value-chain.    This  move  is  set  to  advance  further  as 

technology  becomes  completely  integral  to  modern  retailing,  including  greater  use  of  Big 

Data  analytics  and  artificial  intelligence  (AI)  with  applications  such  as  smart  shelves 

2 

 
 
 
 
 
Final Report 

Levelling the Playing Field 2.0 

interacting  with  shoppers  and  augmented  reality  displays  to  enhance  the  shopping 

experience and propel sales.4 

1.6 

These technological developments and changing consumer shopping habits are driving key 

changes  in  Europe’s  retail  sector,  with  distinct  consequences  for  market  structure  as 

different  forms  and  formats  of  retailing  become  more  or  less  popular.    In  particular,  six 

market features stand out as indicative of the major structural changes taking place:  

  Growth  in  online  retailing  –  rapid  for  many  non-food  products  and  developing  for 

internet grocery retailing 

  Growth 

in  multichannel  retailing  –  successful 

integrated  retailers  exploiting 

omnichannel presence 

  Growth in European-wide retailing – especially with the growing international spread 

of discounters with strong pan-European brand identity 

  Decline  of  high  streets  and  city  centres  across  Europe  -  being  undermined  by  the 

prolonged effects of the economic crisis and a shift to online shopping and discount 

retailing 

  Declining need for very large format stores – being undermined by a shift to online 

shopping and discount retailing 

  New  technological  era  –  with  an  arms  race  in  utilising  data  analytics  and  artificial 

intelligence  to  enhance  the  in-store  shopper  experience  and  allow  real-time 

adjustments to the retail offer, including dynamic pricing, to drive retail sales   

1.7 

These  rapidly  evolving  market  features  mean  that  independent  retailer  groups  need  to 

respond  decisively  to  remain  efficient  and  competitive  while  enhancing  their  retail 

proposition  to  consumers.    Rival  organisations  are  already  positioning  themselves  to  take 

advantage  of  these  market  changes  and  so  posing  an  increasing  competitive  threat  to 

independent  retailer  groups.    In  particular,  integrated  retail  chains  are  moving  quickly 

towards  omnichannel  retailing  to  continue  their  market  dominance.    At  the  same  time, 

especially  in  the  grocery  sector,  the  international  expansion  of  hard  discounters  is  driving 

increased  price  competition  and  a  greater  need  for  cost  efficiency  while  competing  on 

service and product quality.  A further threat to losing sales is through the growing influence 

of  specialist  (“pure  play”)  online  retailers  (whether  selling  through  their  own  websites  or 

4  For  a  range  of  examples,  see  Associated  Press,  "The  future  of  shopping”,  Daily  Mail,  3/1/2017 
(http://www.dailymail.co.uk/sciencetech/article-4084612/Here-come-smart-stores-robots-
interactive-shelves.html); and Ben Sullivan, “From AR to robots, we're finally getting the store of the 
future,” WIRED, 14/9/2017 (https://www.wired.co.uk/article/future-of-shopping-predictions). 

3 

 
 
 
 
                                                      
Final Report 

Levelling the Playing Field 2.0 

using  third-party  online  platforms)  and  the  prospect  of  manufacturers  selling  directly  to 

consumers, so bypassing the need to go through retailers.  The scene is set for a very intense 

competitive  battle  in  European  retail  markets  in  the  coming  years,  but  at  the  risk  that 

markets become tippy and rapidly concentrate in winner-takes-all scenarios that ultimately 

leads to harmful monopolisation. 

1.8  While  wanting  to  be  part  of  the  New  Retail  era  revolution  and  improve  their  retail 

proposition  to  benefit  consumers,  independent  retailer  groups  face  key obstacles  that  are 

impeding their ability to compete on effective and fair terms due to existing EU competition 

policy and other regulatory restrictions that discriminate against them and work in favour of 

integrated retailers.  In particular, because the ties between such groups and their individual 

retail  outlets  are  contractual  with  separate  ownership/control  rather  than  integrated  by 

common  ownership/control  then  EU  competition  law  does  not  recognise  and  treat  such 

groups  as  single  organisations  or  unified  systems.    As  a  consequence,  these  groups  are 

treated  as  a  nexus  of  market  contracts  to  be  governed  by  EC  guidance  on  vertical  and 

horizontal  agreements,  which  to  some  extent  prevents  or  limits  them  using  practices  for 

which integrated retailers are free to use. This notably applies to the ability to set common 

prices  and  common  assortments,  share  data  and  information  (e.g.  on  sales  and  demand) 

across the store network, and undertake joint purchasing and joint marketing.  

1.9 

In particular, existing restrictions and legal uncertainty over permissible practices are holding 

back independent retailer groups in developing online retailing to complement their physical 

store operations and establish an effective and fully coordinated omnichannel system.   

1.10  Three current policy aspects are giving particular cause for concern to independent retailer 

groups  in  impeding  their  operating  efficiency,  undermining  their  flexibility  and  agility  to 

move quickly in response to competition, and hindering their investment planning:   

  First, E-commerce and the challenge facing independent retailer groups to become a 

visible,  competitive  presence  in  the  online  market  when  they  face  legal  obstacles 

(because  of  how  competition  authorities  interpret  their  ownership  and  control 

structure in the context of the EC vertical guidelines and horizontal guidelines) against 

using  common  pricing,  if  necessarily  supported  by  resale  price  maintenance,  and 

where  these  legal  obstacles  serve  to  distort,  restrict  and  prevent  competition  in 

favour of integrated retailers; 

4 

 
 
 
 
 
Final Report 

Levelling the Playing Field 2.0 

  Second,  the  need  for  selective  distribution  to  remain  a  viable  business  tool  for 

independent retailers in the age of the internet platform to provide efficiency benefits 

and help promote and support effective competition; 

  Third,  franchising  rules  in  the  contractual  arrangements  between  the  independent 

retailer and the central office of the group of independent retailers being developed 

or considered at the EU level which could undermine efficiency and detract from the 

pro-competitive  benefits  from  existing  franchising  rules  and  guidance  that  are 

relevant to independent retailer groups. 

1.11 

In  addition,  there  are  other  longstanding  issues  over  policy  restrictions  and  rules  that  are 

impeding independent retailer groups and are now having a greater bearing in view of the 

changing retail landscape.  In particular, there is an urgent need for policymakers to address 

how the following policy aspects are adversely impacting independent retailer groups and so 

undermining effective and fair retail competition:  

i.  Discriminatory legal treatment in regard to permitted vertical and horizontal control  

ii.  Limits to pro-competitive agreements on joint purchasing and joint marketing 

iii.  Legal uncertainty hanging over existing trading, supply and distribution arrangements 

iv.  Arbitrary  market  share  thresholds  used  in  European  Commission  (EC)  rules  and 

guidance on vertical and horizontal agreements 

v.  Continuing  scepticism  and  distrust  towards  common  pricing  and  resale  price 

maintenance  (RPM)  despite  clear  economic  benefits  in  the  context  of  use  within 

independent retailer groups 

1.12  This  report  will  explain  further  the  economic  harm  that  is  resulting  from  discriminatory 

policy treatment and legal uncertainty and how this is affecting operational and investment 

decisions for independent retailer groups. 

1.13  The European Commission has recently issued a communication on policy measures  and a 

desire to see deregulation that will help to establish “a European retail sector fit for the 21st 

century”.5    The Commission berates national authorities  for creating  restrictive regulations 

that lead to less dynamic retail markets and uses a Retail Restrictiveness Indicator (RRI) as a 

means  to  “name  and  shame”  different  EU  member  states.    However,  in  no  place  in  the 

Communication  is  there  any  consideration  as  to  how  the  EC’s  own  policy  measures  and 

5  European Commission, “A European retail sector fit for the 21st century,” Communication from the 
Commission to the European Parliament, the Council, the European Economic and Social Committee 
and the Committee of the Regions, SWD(2018) 236 final, 19/4/2018. 

5 

 
 
 
 
 
                                                      
Final Report 

Levelling the Playing Field 2.0 

guidance  are  distorting  retail  competition  because  of  the  way  they  discriminate  against 

different  retail  business  forms.    Indeed,  the  survey  of  retail  organisations  reported  in  this 

present study points to EC policy and less so national policy as the main source of restrictive 

regulations  that  are  holding  back  effective  competition  in  retailing  by  creating  an  uneven 

playing field that distorts competition in favour of integrated retailers and retail tech giants 

and works against other retail organisation forms.  

1.14  Given  this  context  and  the  economic  importance  of  the  retail  sector  to  the  EU  economy, 

there  is  a  very  pressing  need  to  review  EC  competition  guidance  and  rules  to  ensure  that 

they  are  appropriate  and  fit  for  purpose.    In  particular,  it  is vital  that  EC  policy  provides  a 

level playing field for all retail organisations to compete on fair terms for the greater benefit 

of consumers.  Existing EU competition policy fails to do this because it does not adequately 

distinguish  between  inter-organisational  relationships  and  intra-organisational  contracting 

and control mechanisms, so automatically applies competition rules designed for the former 

to the latter.  

1.15  The  consequence  of  failing  to  draw  adequate  and  appropriate  distinctions  is  that  EC  rules 

discriminate  against  independent  retailer  groups, which are  denied the same  liberal policy 

treatment  afforded to integrated retailers  and instead are subjected to  rules that severely 

inhibit  their  business  operations  and  deny  them  vital  efficiency  and  competitiveness.  Such 

discriminatory  treatment  creates  a  tilted  playing  field  and  so  serves  to  distort  rather 

enhance competition in favour of integrated retailers and retail tech giants. 

1.16 

In terms of the policy recommendations that emerge from the findings in this report, there 

are four key points to stress: 

i. 

Independent retailer groups do not require special treatment and unduly favourable 

policies – they just need equality 

ii.  These  groups  just  need  a  level  legal  playing  field  to  allow  them  to  compete  on 

effective terms with other forms of retailers 

iii.  Economic welfare benefits from ensuring effective retail competition to the advantage 

of consumers 

iv.  Action  and  clarity  is  required  now  to  ensure  consumers  benefit  from  retail  choice, 

variety, efficiency and fair competition in the emerging new retail era 

6 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Final Report 

Levelling the Playing Field 2.0 

1.B  Objectives of the present study 

1.17  The purpose of this economic study is to examine market and policy developments that are 

currently impacting or set to impact the competitiveness of independent retailer groups in 

view of the rapid changes taking place in the retail sector across the different member states 

of the European Union.   

1.18  The economic study covers both analytical and empirical perspectives while building on and 

extending  the  analysis  of  my  previous  report  undertaken  at  the  request  of  Independent 

Retail  Europe  (then  called  UGAL)  titled  “Levelling  the  Playing  Field:  Competition  policy  to 

enable  independent  retailer  groups  to  be  efficient  and  competitive”  released  in  January 

2007.    This  new  study  takes  account  of  the  very  considerable  market  and  policy 

developments that have taken place over the last decade and the new ones emerging in the 

new  era  of  retailing,  principally  in  respect  of  the  rapid  growth  of  online  retailing  and  the 

substantial structural changes taking place in retailing across the European Union. 

1.19  The new retail era offers the promises of a seamless omnichannel shopping experience but, 

as  this  study  shows  in  Section  2,  independent  retailer  groups  will  struggle  because  of 

competition policy to provide an efficient and integrated service desired by consumers.  This 

study  discusses  the  different  strategic  options  available  to  independent  retailer  groups  to 

develop online retailing to complement and fit with their physical store network operations. 

1.20 

In terms of the analytical aspects of the study, the report discusses in Section 3 the nature 

and  characteristics  of  different  retail  business  forms,  to  help  clarify  the  similarities  and 

differences  between independent  retailer  groups, integrated retailers and other forms like 

franchise  systems.    The  discussion  stresses  why  independent  retailer  groups  should  be 

viewed as cohesive organisations or unified systems rather than a merely a nexus of market 

contractual  relationships  involving  restrictive  agreements  between  separate  business 

entities. 

1.21  The  empirical  part  of  the  study  gathers  information  across  a  wide  array  of  independent 

retailer  groups  in  order  to  determine  the  nature  of  existing  activities  and  agreements  for 

these  groups  as  well  as  the  economic  context  in  which  they  are  applied.    To  this  end,  a 

questionnaire study was used to gather primary-sourced data from a survey of independent 

retailer  groups  and  related  organisations  along  with  additional  interviews  with  these 

organisations.  The details of the nature of the questionnaire and the results are summarised 

7 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Final Report 

Levelling the Playing Field 2.0 

in the main report, in section 4, along with full details and analysis of the findings contained 

in Appendices A and B at the end of report.   

1.C  Outline and structure of the report 

1.22  Following  this  section,  the  rest  of  the  report  contains  four  main  sections  and  three 

appendices.   

1.23  Section 2  explains  the  context of the  rapid  changes taking  place  in European  retailing  and 

what  is  meant  by  the  term  “New  Retail”.    Using  a  case  study  for  illustration,  the  section 

shows how and why existing competition policy rules are retarding innovation and impeding 

the development of improved shopping services for the benefit of consumers by preventing 

independent  retailers  groups  establishing  efficient  and  competitive  online  retailing  to 

complement and coordinate with existing offline (physical store) retailing operations. 

1.24  Section  3  considers  the  special  characteristics  and  policy  needs  for  independent  retailer 

groups, examining why EU competition policy has flawed principles in terms of its failure to 

distinguish  between  inter-organisational  and  intra-organisational  relationships  in  terms  of 

how  it  applies  an  assessment  of  horizontal  and  vertical  agreements.    As  background,  the 

section  explains  the  defining  and  special  features  of  independent  retailer  groups  that 

distinguish  this  organisational  form  from  integrated  retailers  and  franchise  systems.  The 

section  also  explains  how  independent  retailer  groups  promote  unity  and  a  common 

identity.  The section explores the policy obstacles to cooperation for independent retailer 

groups and outlines the critical areas where policy review is urgently needed. 

1.25  Section 4 examines the nature and economic role of independent retailer groups, setting out 

some  examples  of  different  groups  as  a  prelude  to  the  details  and  findings  of  the 

questionnaire  survey  information  gathered  from  a  wide  range  of  different  independent 

retailer groups. The section draws on this survey information to identify  the main types of 

organisational  structures  and  composition  of  the  groups  studied,  and  how  they  use 

contractual  agreements  and  arrangements  within  the  groups.    The  section  details  the  key 

challenges identified by the surveyed independent retailer groups and their concerns about 

national and EU policy affecting their businesses impeding their ability to operate efficiently 

and compete effectively to the detriment of consumers. 

1.26  Section 5  draws  conclusions  from  the  study  and makes  policy  recommendations,  stressing 

the  needs  for  a  level  playing  field  for  retail  forms  to  support  effective  competition  and 

8 

 
 
 
   
 
 
 
Final Report 

Levelling the Playing Field 2.0 

efficiency.    The  section  also  outlines  specific  measures,  taking  account  of  the  rapid 

developments  happening  in  retailing  and  the  need  to  maintain  and  promote  effective 

competition through policy that supports rather than inhibits the efficiency of independent 

retailer groups. 

1.27 

In addition, there are four appendices to the report: 

1)  Appendix A shows the 40-question questionnaire used in the survey of independent 

retailer groups. 

2)  Appendix  B  provides  a  full  and  comprehensive  analysis  of  the  findings  from  the 

questionnaire study, tabulating and summarising the responses to all forty questions 

for  all  the  participating  groups,  for  which  Section  4  of  the  report  provides  a 

summary.  

3)  Appendix  C  gives  examples  of  the  development  and  national  policy  treatment  of 

independent  retailer  groups,  drawing  particularly  on  the  experience  and  legal 

support  afforded  to  retailer  cooperatives  in  France  in  illustrating  helpful  policy 

practice with lessons that could be applied and relevant to other jurisdictions in the 

EU 

4)  Appendix  D  examines  current  policy  towards 

independent  retailer  groups, 

considering  the  EC’s  policy  approach  towards  mixed  structures  of  agreements  as 

well  as  relevant  market  definition  and  critical  market  shares  used  in  assessing 

competition.  The appendix explores in more detail how policy assessment on joint 

purchasing and non-compete obligations relate to independent retailer groups.  The 

appendix 

concludes  with 

consideration  of  how  policy 

towards 

joint 

commercialisation  and  retail  pricing  requirements  restricts  independent  retailer 

groups  in  the  new  retail  era  to  a  much  higher  degree  than  before  and  can  inhibit 

competition to the detriment of consumers. 

9 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Final Report 

Levelling the Playing Field 2.0 

10 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Final Report 

Levelling the Playing Field 2.0 

2. CHALLENGES FOR INDEPENDENT RETAILER GROUPS 
IN THE NEW RETAIL ERA 

This section explains the context of the rapid changes taking place in European retailing, led 
by  technology  in  what  is  called  the  New  Retail  Era.    These  changes  pose  a  significant 
competitive  challenge  for  independent  retailer  groups  to  develop  their  retail  operations  to 
provide  an  omnichannel  service  for  the  greater  convenience  of  consumers.  However,  EU 
competition  policy  is  hampering  the  ability  of  independent  retailer  groups  to  compete 
effectively with integrated retailers and other retail forms which are permitted full or at least 
greater  control  in  how  online  selling  and  delivery  is  integrated  with  offline  selling  through 
store networks. Using a case study for illustration, this section shows how and why existing 
competition policy rules are retarding innovation and impeding the development of improved 
shopping  services  for  the  benefit  of  consumers  by  preventing  independent  retailers  groups 
establishing  efficient  and  competitive  online  retailing  to  complement  and  coordinate  with 
existing offline (physical store) retailing. 

2.A  The New Retail Era 

“Tomorrow’s  business  model  will  not  involve  a  choice  between  physical  and 
digital  commerce.  Its  aim  will  be  to  ensure  that  customers  can  move  fluidly 
between different product categories and sales channels. Today, we describe this 
as omnichannel commerce. But soon it will just be called retail, which will have 
been reinvented once again.” 

Dominique Schelcher, Système U, President6 

2.1  Retailing across the globe is going through considerable changes presently.  These changes 

are ushering in a new epoch in retailing, called the New Retail era, driven by new technology 

pushing forwards online retailing, multichannel retailing, increased use of Big Data, and the 

emergence of artificial intelligence and the application of algorithms and machine learning in 

selling  services  and  providing  customer  information.    The  new  retail  era  promises 

omnichannel  retailing,  providing  consumers  with  a  seamless  shopping  experience  whether 

6  Source: as quoted in “Retail’s Revolution: How Retail and Consumer Goods Companies Can Adapt,” 
Oliver 
(http://www.oliverwyman.com/content/dam/oliver-
wyman/v2/publications/2018/april/Retails-Revolution-onscreen-version.pdf). 

Wyman, 

2018, 

73 

p. 

11 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                      
Final Report 

Levelling the Playing Field 2.0 

the  customer  is  shopping  online  from  a  desktop  or  mobile  device,  by  telephone  or  in  a 

physical (bricks and mortar) store.7 

2.2 

These  technology-driven  developments  are  changing  consumer  behaviour  and  spending 

patterns, which in turn are shaping the structure and development of retailing.  This is most 

evident in respect of the growth of online retailing, which has been rapid for non-food sales 

but  is  now  developing  for  grocery  sales.8    At  the  same  time,  successful  large  retailers  are 

growing multichannel retail operations with a view to providing the consumer with all-round 

convenience and an enhanced and integrated shopping experience.9    

2.3 

The  success  of  online  retailing  is  having  considerable  knock-on  consequences  for  sales 

through  physical  stores.  Small  stores  lacking  scale  advantages,  unless offering  a  distinctive 

service, are vulnerable to a loss of trade.  However, the effect may also be felt on big stores. 

In particular, as consumers switch to buying online, then there is a declining need for large 

format specialist (“big box”) superstores selling commodity goods which can be conveniently 

purchased online.10  Now this effect is being felt too by hypermarkets in the grocery sector 

Logistics  Management,  Vol.  48 

7 For a detailed review of the academic literature on omnichannel retailing and how it requires close 
integration  of  all  sales  and  logistics  functions  to  ensure  a  smooth,  seamless  operation,  see  Erdem 
Galipoglu, Herbert Kotzab, Christoph Teller, Isik Özge Yumurtaci Hüseyinoglu, Jens Pöppelbuß, (2018) 
"Omni-channel retailing research – state of the art and intellectual foundation", International Journal 
of  Physical  Distribution  & 
Issue:  4,  pp.365-390, 
https://doi.org/10.1108/IJPDLM-10-2016-0292.   
8  The  value  of  online  sales  in  the  EU  practically  doubled  between  2012  and  2017  from  €121bn  to 
€224bn. Products most commonly sold on-line include clothes and sports goods (purchased by 64% of 
e-buyers  in  2017),  household  goods  (46%),  books,  magazines  and  e-learning  material  (36%)  and 
electronic equipment (25%). In the ten years from 2006 to 2016, the share of online sales quadrupled 
from 2% to 8% of all EU retail sales.  Source: European Commission, “A European retail sector fit for 
the 21st century,” Commission Staff Working Document, COM(2018) 219 final, 19/4/2018. 
9   Some 22% of EU retailers sold online in 2016, up from 13% in 2011, while 44% of online sales were 
carried out by physical retailers operating outside of online platforms. Brick-and-mortar retailers that 
sell on online platforms or online marketplaces account for a large share of such sales (36% in 2015).  
Yet, sales through online-only retailers account for over half of all EU online sales (56% of all internet 
sales of goods in 2017, up from 50% in 2011). However, these online-only retailers are increasingly 
opening up physical shops to cater to consumers that wish to handle products or ask for advice before 
buying, or obtain their product immediately. In the 2015  European Commission e-commerce  sector 
inquiry  (http://ec.europa.eu/competition/antitrust/sector_inquiries_e_commerce.html)  some  8%  of 
respondents  to  a  survey  of  online-only  retailers  reported  that  they  planned  to  open  a  brick-and-
mortar shop within the next two years. Source: ibid. 
10  The  decline  of  big  box  retailing  has  been  especially  evident  in  the  United  States  where  online 
retailing  has  grown  very  rapidly  resulting  in  many  large-format  retailers  closing  stores  (e.g.  “The 
decline  of  established  American  retailing  threatens  jobs,”  The  Economist,  13/5/2017)  or  filing  for 
(see 
bankruptcy 

Apocalypse” 

termed 

“Retail 

what 

been 

has 

the 

in 

12 

 
 
 
 
                                                      
Final Report 

Levelling the Playing Field 2.0 

that  have  lost  non-food  sales  and  are  now  beginning  to  be  challenged  by  online  grocery 

sales.  At  the  same  time,  discount  retailing  has  become  more  popular,  operating  through 

mid-size store formats with the dual appeal of shopping convenience and low prices.11  This 

has facilitated the international spread of limited-assortment discounters, which in turn has 

led  to  established  mainstream  retailers  re-assessing  and  adjusting  their  market  positions, 

leading to turbulence  through mergers and acquisitions, along with divestments and store 

closures.12 

2.4 

For  independent  retailer  groups,  this  new  era  brings  new  competitive  challenges.  These 

groups are seeing the major integrated chains moving quickly towards omnichannel retailing 

to continue their market dominance.  At the same time, the international expansion of hard 

discounters  is  driving  increased  price  competition  and  a  greater  need  for  cost  efficiency 

while competing on service and product quality.  Additionally, there is an increasing threat 

to losing sales through the growing influence of specialist online retailers and the prospect 

of  direct  supply  by  manufacturers  straight  to  consumers,  so  bypassing  the  need  to  go 

through retailers.   

2.5  However,  it  is  technology  and  the  approach  of  the  New  Retail  model  that  poses  an 

existential threat since its purpose is to integrate online, offline, logistics and data across a 

single  value-chain.  In  this  respect  the  major  retail  tech  giants  and  platform-based  online 

retailers,  like  Amazon,  Alibaba,  Xiaomi  and  Tencent-JD.com  lead  the  way  as  they  extend 

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Retail_apocalypse). Store closures on this scale have yet to be seen in 
Europe but the risk increases as online retailing grows. For instance, the UK saw a net closure of 1,700 
stores in 2017 with a further 650 in early 2018 (Sarah Butler, “6,000 shops close in tough year for UK's 
high streets,” The Guardian, 11/4/2018 (https://www.theguardian.com/business/2018/apr/11/tough-
year-high-street-internet-shopping-weak-pound); James  Graham,  “High  Street  crisis forces hundreds 
of store closures,” BBC News, 24/4/2018 (http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/business-43871596). 

11 For evidence of the slowdown in the growth of grocery superstores in favour of mid-size discount 
stores across Europe, see Paul W. Dobson, “Grocery Retailing Concentration and Competition in the 
European Union,” Competition in the Food Retail Sector Workshop, European Parliament, 2/5/2017 
(http://www.europarl.europa.eu/RegData/etudes/STUD/2016/578981/IPOL_STU(2016)578981_EN.p
df). 
12  For instance, industry observers point to the increasing market share of discounters as a motivating 
factor behind the recently proposed merger of Asda and Sainsbury’s in the UK  – e.g. David Dawkins, 
“Sainsbury’s  -  Asda  merge  to  fend  off  Germany’s  £26bn  supermarket  superpower,”  The  Express, 
4/5/2018 
-  https://www.express.co.uk/finance/city/955307/Sainsburys-Asda-middle-class-merger-
Lidl-Aldi-Uk-supermarkets-shop-retail).  

13 

 
 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                        
Final Report 

Levelling the Playing Field 2.0 

their reach into owning physical stores.13  As an example, Exhibit 2.1 illustrates the consumer 

appeal and business logic of the New Retail model as being currently advanced  by Alibaba 

Group.    The  world’s  leading  integrated  chains  will  be  intent  to  follow.  The  considerable 

efficiency,  synergies  and  economies  of  scale  provided  by  a  seamless  integration  of 

operations  into  a  single  value-chain  with  mass  consumer  appeal  will  inevitably  place  all 

retailers unable to match these capabilities at a huge competitive disadvantage.   

Exhibit 2.1 – The “New Retail” Model 

2.6 

The term “New Retail” is the name that Alibaba Group, the Chinese e-commerce giant and 
one  of  the  world’s  most  highly  valued  corporations  with  $40bn  turnover  and  $10bn  net 
income  in  2018,  uses  to  describe  its  business  model  in  combining  online  and  offline 
retailing with leading-edge shopping technology to achieve full channel management: 

“Pure e-commerce will be reduced to a traditional business and replaced by the 
concept  of  New  Retail  –  the  integration  of  online,  offline,  logistics  and  data 
across a single value-chain.” 

Jack Ma, Chairman, Alibaba Group (October 2016)14   

“We  are  driving  the  age  of  ‘New  Retail’,  which  leverages  Big  Data  and 
innovation to provide a seamless online and offline experience for nearly half a 
billion mobile monthly active users. This retail transformation will make it even 
easier  and  more  efficient  for  brands  and  retailers  to  engage  with  these 
consumers anywhere, anytime.” 

Daniel Zhang, CEO Alibaba (January 2017)15 

13  For example, Amazon moved to buy the grocery chain Whole Foods Market in 2017 and launched 
Amazon  Go  as  a  check-out  free  grocery  store  in  2018  (source:  BBC  News,  “Amazon  opens  a 
supermarket  with  no  checkouts,”  22/1/2018,  http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/business-42769096). 
Xiaomi,  the  Chinese  tech  giant  and  online  retailer,  opened  more  than  200  stores  across  China  and 
another 130 official Xiaomi stores abroad in 2017, while Alibaba has built up a large ownership stake 
in  the  Intime  store  chain  and  has  been  experimenting  with  an  unmanned  supermarket  called  Tao 
Café,  and  similarly  JD.com,  China’s  second  largest  e-commerce  company,  launched  its  first  offline 
high-tech supermarket in Beijing, 7Fresh, in 2018, while tech giant Tencent invested in a number of 
supermarket  ventures  across  China  and  opened  its  first  unmanned  shop,  We  Life,  in  2018  (source: 
Michael  Wade  and  Jialu  Shan,  “How  China  is  rebooting  retail,”  The  Conversation,  15/3/2018 
(http://theconversation.com/how-china-is-rebooting-retail-92982)). 
14 Source: as quoted by Deborah Weinswig, “Alibaba's New Retail Integrates E-Commerce, Stores, & 
14/4/2017 
Gen 
Logistics: 
(https://www.forbes.com/sites/deborahweinswig/2017/04/14/alibabas-new-retail-integrates-e-
commerce-stores-logistics-is-this-the-next-gen-of-retail/#664656b4767c). 
15 Source: as quoted by Business Wire, “Alibaba Group Announces December Quarter 2016 Results,” 
24/1/2017 
(https://www.businesswire.com/news/home/20170124005719/en/Alibaba-Group-
Announces-December-Quarter-2016-Results). 

Retail?” 

Forbes, 

Next 

This 

The 

Of 

Is 

14 

 
 
 
 
                                                      
Final Report 

Levelling the Playing Field 2.0 

The “new” element of New Retail is in combining elements of offline and online retail to 
make them an integrated whole.  This entails a fully coordinated systems approach to e-
commerce,  physical  retail,  and  logistics  in  order  to  improve  the  efficiency  of  selling  and 
buying, as well as improve the shopping experience.  

Utilising ‘Big Data’ is at the core of New Retail. Detailed data on consumers’ preferences, 
shopping  habits,  and  purchasing  history  allows  the  retailer  to  provide  consumers  with 
ready  access  to  tailored  product  information  to  drive  sales,  while  enabling  efficient 
delivery and effective inventory management.  

The  integration  of  online,  offline  and  logistics  provides  consumers  with  a  highly 
convenient,  flexible  and  attractive  omnichannel  shopping  experience,  so  expanding  the 
consumer  base  and  increasing  sales,  while  setting  new  industry  standards  for  other 
retailers to try and match or indeed exceed for competitive advantage.16  

2.7 

The combination of these structural market features and technological developments mean 

that  there  is  an  urgent  need  for  independent  retailer  groups  to  respond  to  the  changing 

retail  environment.    However,  legal  uncertainty  and  restrictions  impeding  independent 

retailer groups hold back making key decisions and investments, which impacts these retail 

organisations  but  also  consumers  if  competition  suffers  as  a  consequence.  In  particular, 

because such groups are not fully integrated by single ownership, there is considerable legal 

uncertainty as the  extent to which the different  parties  within the group can legally share 

and  exchange  information  and  coordinate  a  contractual  trading  system  that  will  allow  for 

optimising  efficiency.  In  contrast,  integrated  retailer  groups,  with  single  ownership  and 

integrated control of their retail distribution systems, do not face any such legal restrictions, 

and are entirely free to organise information flows and trading arrangements as they desire 

within their own organisations. 

2.B  Challenges in developing omnichannel retailing 

2.8 

The  New  Retail  era  focusing  on  omnichannel  retailing  poses  a  substantial  competitive 

challenge  to both physical store  retailers and pure online  retailers because the New Retail 

model utilises both retail modes  along with mobile commerce to provide greater all-round 

16    For  examples  of  how  other  retailers  are  also  applying  the  same  disruptive  business  model,  see 
“Retail’s Revolution: How Retail and Consumer Goods Companies Can Adapt,” Oliver Wyman, 2018, p. 
73 
(http://www.oliverwyman.com/content/dam/oliver-wyman/v2/publications/2018/april/Retails-
Revolution-onscreen-version.pdf). 

15 

 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                      
Final Report 

Levelling the Playing Field 2.0 

convenience combined with an enhanced shopping experience through applying technology 

and data analytics on customer preferences, shopping habits and buying needs.  

2.9  On a global scale, the major retail tech giants, like Amazon, Alibaba, Tencent-JD.com, lead 

the way in this retail revolution, but the major integrated chain-store retailers, like Walmart, 

are striking key partnerships to make sure they have both a strong and coordinated physical 

store  network  and  online  presence  supported  by  accessible  shopping  technology.17  

Meanwhile,  other physical  store  retailers are seeking to develop online  operations so that 

they  can  provide  more  convenient  services  to  consumers  through  24/7  shopping,  home 

delivery, ‘click and collect’, and product information supplied via mobile devices and social 

media. 

2.10 

Independent retailer groups would like to be part of this revolution as well.  However, in the 

EU they face  competition policy restrictions that hamper their ability and agility to extend 

their  physical  store  operations  to  an  effective  and  fully  coordinated  omnichannel  system.  

Consequently,  they  are  lagging  behind  the  major  integrated  retailers  in  this  technological 

race,  with  implications  for  the  future  competitive  structure  of  retailing  which  is  likely  to 

become  increasingly  concentrated  in  a  winner-takes-all  tippy  market  situation  where 

network effects and scale efficiencies dominate.  

2.11 

In particular, independent retailer groups seeking to develop a competitive presence in the 

online  market  face  legal  obstacles  because  of  how  competition  authorities  interpret  their 

ownership  structure  in  the  context  of  the  EC  vertical  guidelines  and  horizontal  guidelines. 

Principally,  EC  guidelines  prevent  independent  retailer  groups  using  common  pricing,  if 

necessarily  supported  by  resale  price  maintenance  (RPM),  across  their  independent  retail 

members  as  well  as  sharing  their  sales  information  and  prescribing  product  ranges,  all  of 

which  are  essential  to  a  fully  coordinated,  data-analytic-driven  multichannel  retail  system.  

As such, these legal obstacles serve to distort, restrict and prevent competition in favour of 

integrated retailers and retail tech companies.  

2.12 

In  the  absence  of  being  able  to  develop  fully  coordinated  and  integrated  multichannel 

systems,  independent  retailer  groups  face  choosing  between  the  less  efficient  options  for 

developing  online  sales  through  either  a  centralised  or  decentralised  model.    Both  models 

are  limited  in  respect  of  coordination  across  the  store  network  and  the  need  for 

17 Ibid. 

16 

 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                      
Final Report 

Levelling the Playing Field 2.0 

membership  support  while  also  abiding  by  existing  competition  laws  restricting  horizontal 

and vertical agreements. 

2.13  With a centralised model, where all e-commerce is centrally controlled, the group acts as the 

seller  in  direct  contact  with  the  customer.  It  executes  all  functions  associated  with  selling 

(taking  orders,  billing,  receiving  payment,  delivery,  after-sales),  determines  the  price  and 

receives  all  payments,  regardless  of  the  customer’s  location.    The  central  operation  is 

thereby separate and distinct from individual stores, so online and offline prices, ranges and 

services  can  differ  in  the  absence  of  integrated  control,  which  can  undermine  brand 

reputation  for  consistency  and  cause  consumer  confusion  while  raising  consumers’  search 

costs to obtain best value for money. 

2.14  With  a  decentralised  model,  each  shop  acts  as  a  seller  for  its  own  website  or  web  page, 

setting and amending prices as it sees fit.  Online customers choose their delivery location 

before examining the offer and placing the order directly with the distributor. Accordingly, 

there is no single online price, which again can undermine brand reputation for consistency 

and  cause  consumer  confusion  while  raising  consumers’  search  costs.    In  addition,  the 

consumer  faces  a  less  convenient  online  service,  involving  more  choices,  more  clicks  and 

more time (because the choice of local retailer has to be selected first before choosing and 

ordering goods), compared to the faster and smoother online service offered by integrated 

retailers. 

2.15  While  both  types  of  business  model  might  be  workable,  they  are  unlikely  to  be  as 

coordinated,  integrated,  efficient,  responsive  and  competitive  as  that  which  integrated 

retailers or franchise systems can deliver with strong vertical control in offering a seamless, 

unified and consistent buying and deliver service.   Allowing independent retailer groups to 

set  common  uniform  prices  for  online  (and,  where  necessary,  offline)  sales  would  help 

improve  brand  consistency  and  give  consumers  the  assurance  of  obtaining  the  best  price 

from  the  store  network. 

  Similarly,  allowing  independent  retailer  groups  to  share 

information  on  sales  and  prescribe  product  ranges  would  help  improve  the  efficiency  of 

logistics,  stock  replenishment  and  supply  operations  along  with  assuring  local  product 

availability for the benefit of consumers.  

2.C  Case Study: Decentralised Online Model 

17 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Final Report 

Levelling the Playing Field 2.0 

2.16  As a means to illustrate the challenges and obstacles that independent retailer groups face 

in  developing  efficient  multichannel  retailing,  it  might  be  instructive  to  consider  a  case  in 

more detail.  For this purpose, let us consider the situation of an independent retailer group 

seeking  to  develop  a  decentralised  online  model  intended  to  complement  and  utilise  a 

physical  store  network  of  independent  grocery  retailers  while  necessarily  being  compliant 

with the current restrictions of EU competition law and EC policy guidelines.  This illustrative 

case, based on the experiences of a prominent independent retailer group, is useful since it 

highlights the challenges in providing additional services on a competitive basis to customers 

to  improve  their  shopping  experience  and  for  their greater  convenience.  This is  extremely 

important  in  economic  terms  since  an  efficient  and  effective  service  will  help  to  raise 

consumer welfare while an innovative service supports dynamic competition and economic 

progress, which competition policymakers should welcome and support.  

The process from purchase intent to delivery in detail 

2.17  The online consumer’s purchasing experience begins at the web page or the corresponding 

mobile  app,  where  the  consumer  selects  the  online  shopping  option.  The  first  choice  the 

consumer needs to make is to choose from which store to shop among the available stores 

in the independent retailer group. Potential stores that offer online shopping are identified 

by the consumer entering his/her zip code to their home or delivery address and selecting 

the store from a list of stores. After making that choice, the consumer must specify whether 

s/he  wants  home  delivery or to pick up the goods in the store. In  some cases, the chosen 

store  only  offers  one  of  those  delivery  options,  meaning  that  the  consumer  may  have  to 

choose  another  store.  The next  time  a consumer enters  the web page  or the app  then  by 

default they are directed to the independent retailer they chose last time. 

2.18  After  the  selection of  the  store,  the  consumer will  click  his/her way to the  specific  store's 

website  on  the  independent  retailer  group  platform.  The  consumer  can  then choose  from 

the assortment from the store of his/her choice. Except for a comparatively small number of 

stores that are signed up to a newly opened dark store with a common and larger number of 

product  articles,  the  assortment  of  any  particular  store  contains  a  unique  assortment  for 

that store. That is, assortments and prices differ between the online stores in the same way 

as they differ between the physical stores. When the consumer has finished his/her buying 

process, the checkout will begin with three steps:  

(i)  An  article  summary  with  the  total  price  and  fees  must  be  approved  by  the 

consumer to proceed.  

18 

 
 
 
 
Final Report 

Levelling the Playing Field 2.0 

(ii)  The consumer chooses which day and time s/he either wants to get access to the 

goods  through  home  delivery  or  collect  in  store.  Available  time  slots  are 

displayed.  

(iii)  When the consumer has chosen delivery or time for collection, s/he will continue 

to click to reach payment display. Here the consumer can choose to pay by card 

or by issue of invoice.  

2.19  Compared  with  integrated  chains  or  pure  online  players,  the  purchase  process  is 

substantially  extended  because  of  the  business  model  of  the  independent  retailer  group. 

Specifically,  the  consumer  must  make  more  choices  (clicks)  before  s/he  can  start  adding 

products  to  the  virtual  customer  basket.  Indeed,  internal  studies  have  shown  that  the 

average  consumer  experience 

includes  nine  additional  steps  (clicks)  compared  to 

competitors. This is mainly explained by the business model where the independent retailer 

group members are formally required by competition law to compete, i.e. a requirement for 

intra-organisational  competition,  so  that  the  group  is  prevented  from  using  common 

uniform pricing even though it might be advantageous to the consumer by signalling a clear 

and consistent offer and so help stimulate inter-organisational competition with rival retail 

organisations. 

Technical challenges in the decentralised online model of the independent retailer group 

2.20  The group model is based on the principle that consumers choose which store to purchase 

from  online.  Each  store  has  its  own  assortment  range,  pricing  and  delivery  options.  This 

means, in effect, that the digital purchasing process will be longer and more complex for the 

consumer compared to the digital offer of integrated chains or pure online players, because 

it entails multiple decisions, choices and clicks on the website, through different webpages, 

or in the app.  

2.21  Figure  2.1  illustrates  the  difference  in  the  consumer’s  online  buying  process  between  the 

decentralised online model for an independent retailer group compared to the experience of 

using  an  integrated  chain  or  pure  online  player.    When  using  the  online  service  of  the 

independent  retailer  group,  the  consumer  must  decide  and  click  through  at  least  three 

decisions which s/he does not have to make in the online model of an integrated chain or a 

pure  online  player.    The  consumer  must  find  a  store  which  offers  online  purchases,  s/he 

must  find  a  store  which  delivers  home,  and  s/he  must  decide  if  the  chosen  store  has  an 

assortment  and  a  price  range  of  interest.  In  the  online  model  of  an  integrated  chain  the 

19 

 
 
 
 
 
Final Report 

Levelling the Playing Field 2.0 

consumer  can go directly to the choice  of products from the assortment  of the integrated 

chain.  

Figure 2.1 – The consumer online buying process: decentralised online model vs integrated 
chains/pure online players 

2.22  Since  the  independent  retailers  in  the  group  are  legally  required  to  be  in  competition  on 

their  retail  offer  (including  competing  on  prices  and  product  assortments),  the  online 

platform must be built to accommodate the possibility for every single store to sell online. 

The  digital  solutions  are  therefore  less  commonplace  and  necessarily  more  technically 

complex  than  an  online  solution  of  a  typical  integrated  chain  or  pure  online  player, which 

makes  IT  investments  considerably  larger.  Due  to  the  harsh  competition  on  the  retail 

market,  the  higher  costs  associated  with  these  investments  cannot  be  pushed  forward  to 

consumers through higher charges or prices.  

2.23  The independent retailers finance their operations themselves, which in practice means that 

their financing of online investments specifically connected to the store, such as the storing 

area for the grocery bags or new parking areas for customers collecting their purchases, is 

bound by the size of the individual store owners’ premises. This is especially the case for the 

owners of small format stores.  

20 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Final Report 

Levelling the Playing Field 2.0 

Customer communication challenges of the online model of the independent retailer group 

2.24  As  the  importance  of  digital  channels  for  market  communication  and  customer  data 

gathering increase, the competitive advantage of the fully integrated chains or pure online 

players is strengthened.  

2.25  There are three key reasons why independent retailer groups are disadvantaged compared 

to  centralised/  integrated  chains  or  pure  online  players  which  enjoy  the  following 

advantages:  

1)  Digitalisation  makes  it  possible  to  collect  highly  detailed  customer  data  from  the 

individual  consumer,  which  within  the  fully  integrated  chains  or  pure  online  players 

provides  the  basis  for  a  centralised  process  with  optimised  pricing  and  selection  of 

assortments.  Considering  developments  in  Big  Data,  artificial  intelligence  and  data 

power  advances,  individualised  customer  data  create  greater  opportunities  for  a 

central office  to set a profit-maximising price and competitive  product  range  on the 

online market. 

2)  Centrally  set  pricing  and  assortment  of  goods  can  be  constantly  communicated  on 

digital platforms, through the combination of websites, apps and digital direct mail, as 

a  continuous  marketing  campaign.  Due  to  the  increasing  trend  of  online  sales, 

integrated chains or pure online players have a great comparative advantage because 

their customer offer can be continuously updated and communicated on an individual 

consumer  level. Market communication across digital channels costs much less than 

communication in physical channels and can therefore happen more often (in practice 

continuously)  which  gives  competitive  advantages  for  shared  pricing.  Integrated 

chains and pure online players can communicate common prices frequently on both a 

general  and  an 

individual 

level. 

Independent  retailer  organisations  with  a 

decentralized  customer  base  cannot  do  this,  which  means  they  face  a  major 

competitive disadvantage especially on the online market.  

3)  Business  models  with  independent  retailers  are  based  on  local  pricing  and  local 

assortment adapted to local demand. Due to technological opportunities that emerge 

through digitalisation, the market players who communicate common prices have an 

increasing  competitive  advantage  in  terms  of  a  transparent  offer  and  a  unified 

communication to the consumer. In the long run, the business models of independent 

retailers  are  at  risk.  Not  because  the  competitiveness  of  the  decentralised  models 

21 

 
 
 
 
Final Report 

Levelling the Playing Field 2.0 

would  be  weaker,  but  because  legislation  gives  the  centralised  retail  model  a 

technological advantage in the increasingly digital environment of retailing.  

2.26  This  latter  aspect  is  highly  important  because  today's  consumers  are  reached  by  both 

physical  and  digital  market  communications.  The  integrated  chains  or  pure  online  players 

have a major and growing competitive advantage over decentralised retail models, notably 

independent retailer groups, due to centrally placed brand-building market communication 

in  the  digital  world.  This  arises  because  of  two  increasingly  important  factors  in  an 

omnichannel  context.  Online  and  mobile  device  communication,  interaction  and  social 

media are pervasive and consistency in the retail offer is vital.  

2.27  First, it is fundamentally more difficult to get through to the consumer and be perceived as 

relevant  when  communicating  the  retail  offer  if  you  are  permanently  prohibited  to 

communicate  common  prices.  It  is  evident  that  the  retail  offer  becomes  vaguer  and  less 

relevant if marketing and communication cannot include what price the consumer will face 

when purchasing goods, especially when this concerns goods marketed under one and the 

same  brand  –  regardless  if  this  concerns  a  so-called  A-brand  or  a  private  label.    This  is 

especially so in the context of online retailing where consumers can be highly price sensitive 

and  wish  to  search  actively  for  the  best  prices  in  determining  where  to  make  their 

purchases. 

2.28  Second,  brand  communication  has  a  direct  effect  on  the  consumer  and  is  also  filtered 

through  influencers,  social  media  and  public  relations  (PR).  Very  often  influencers  post 

comments on social media questioning retail brands not using common prices, which has a 

negative impact on business models of independent retailers.  

2.D  Lessons and insights 

2.29  The  difficulties  in  establishing  an  efficient,  competitive  and  cost-effective  multichannel 

operation  utilising  a  decentralised  online  model  highlight  broader  challenges  facing 

independent retailer groups in the New Retail era in respect of how they are handicapped by 

existing  competition  policy.  The  decentralised  online  model  ensures  that  every  individual 

store  in  its  network  is  openly  competing  with  each  other,  and  yet  as  an  overarching 

organisation it is hampered in how effectively it can compete with rival retail organisations 

because  current  competition  policy  does  not  adequately  distinguish  between  intra-  and 

inter- organisational competition.  

22 

 
 
 
 
 
Final Report 

Levelling the Playing Field 2.0 

2.30 

In particular, current competition policy does not give enough due regard to how requiring 

intra-organisational competition can actually be harmful to inter-organisational competition. 

Specifically,  competition  law  that  obliges  independent  retail  members  in  the  same 

organisation  to  compete  on  prices  and  product  assortments  can  damage  the  overall  price 

and assortment perception of the organisation in how it competes at a higher level with rival 

retail  organisations.  This  might  not  matter  so  much  when  competition  is  all  about  sales 

through  physical  stores,  where  competition  is  highly  localised,  but  certainly  would  when 

competition increasingly is about online sales where the market is considerably broader and 

where  inconsistencies  in  the  retail  proposition  across  the  store  network  are  more  evident 

and pertinent to consumers.  

2.31  For independent retailer groups, the decentralised online model might be the only realistic 

option available if it is down to stores to undertake order fulfilment and provide the delivery 

or  pickup  service  for  customers.  However,  if  the  online  market  becomes  sufficiently  large 

then it might be possible to adopt a centralised online model (e.g. using “dark stores” for the 

picking and packing and centralised distribution direct to customers). Even so, this will still 

likely  mean  that  online  and  offline  prices  and  assortments  will  differ,  so  risk  undermining 

consistency of the retail proposition represented by the retail organisation overall. It could 

also create tensions in the organisation if individual retail members sense they are losing out 

or are  inadequately compensated for reduced income. Thus,  neither the  decentralised  nor 

the  centralised  online  model  is  ideal  so  long  as  competition  law  requires  independent 

retailers to compete  with each other  on all aspects within the same  system even if to the 

detriment of overall competition with rival organisations.  

2.32  A  further  reason  why  independent  retailer  groups  might  prefer  to  involve  their  retail 

members in a jointly operated online model is to avoid them breaking away with their own 

completely separate online operations which would risk the group’s brand image as well as 

lose scale economies from the joint online operations.  Nonetheless, there  are likely to be 

circumstances  where  these  groups  would  still  allow  their  members  to  develop  their  own 

separate online sales through third-party internet platform providers. This is especially so in 

situations where the group is more like a purchasing group rather than a retail chain (so the 

independent retailer has its own fascia name rather than part of a uniquely branded retail 

chain).  

23 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Final Report 

Levelling the Playing Field 2.0 

2.33  Nevertheless,  if  there  is  such  a  possibility,  it  is  important  that  manufacturers  and 

independent  retailer groups maintain their rights  to operate  selective distribution  that  can 

restrict  retailer  members  from  using  third-party  internet  platforms  if  they  consider  this 

undermines a cohesive brand image or allows for free-riding on store network investments, 

reputation and physical store on pre- and post-sales service.   

2.34  This  is  an  important  issue  because  with  the  move  to  multichannel  retailing,  independent 

retailer groups rely on their retailer members maintaining their physical store sales even if 

they  allow  their  members  to  develop  their  own  separate  online  sales  through  third-party 

internet  platform  providers.    This  maintains  access  for  consumers,  supports  common 

branding, and prevents free riding on the investments in the brand and store network that 

have been made through physical stores developed by independent retailers offline.   

2.35  More  generally,  it  should  be  borne  in  mind  that  selective  distribution  offers  consumer 

benefits  in  protecting  sales  services  and  brand  reputation  while  promoting  effective 

competition  when  based  on  objective  criteria.    For  example,  this  applies  in  circumstances 

where the objective criteria are of a qualitative nature, laid down uniformly for all potential 

resellers, not applied in a discriminatory manner, and for products as necessary to preserve 

their quality and image and attain proper use and sales support.  As such, it is important that 

competition  policy  continues  to  allow  for  selective  distribution  based  on  objective  criteria 

which  can  support  retail  and  product  diversity  while  protecting  brand  investments  to  the 

benefit  of  consumers,  especially  in  an  era  when  multichannel  retailing  is  growing  and  is 

popular with consumers.18 

2.36  While this section has focused on the challenges of developing multichannel retailing, it is 

important  to  bear  in  mind  the  broader  context  of  competition  policy  when  it  operates  to 

impede  and  discriminate  against  independent  retailer  groups  in  a  manner  that  can 

undermine  competition  with  other  retail  business  forms,  principally  with  integrated 

retailers.    The  next  section  of  the  report  sets  out  this  broader  context  and  clarifies  the 

differences  and  similarities  between  different  retail  business  forms,  including  the  types  of 

independent retailer groups.   

18 The European  Court  of  Justice (ECJ) judgment  on  7/12/2017 in respect of  Coty  Germany GmbH  v 
Parfümerie  Akzente  GmbHoIn  (Case  C‑230/16)  provides  clear  recognition  of  the  importance  and 
relevance  of  selective  distribution  based  on  objective  criteria,  specifically  recognising  that  luxury 
goods manufacturers can employ selective distribution systems to preserve the luxury image of  their 
products  and  can  prohibit  their  authorised  distributors  from  utilising  third-party  online  sales 
platforms. 

24 

 
 
 
 
 
                                                      
Final Report 

Levelling the Playing Field 2.0 

25 

 
 
 
 
 
Final Report 

Levelling the Playing Field 2.0 

3. SPECIAL CHARACTERISTICS OF INDEPENDENT 
RETAILER GROUPS 

EU competition policy treats independent retailer groups differently from integrated retailers 
because retail stores are independently owned rather than centrally owned and controlled. 
Consequently  independent  retailer  groups  do  not  have  the  same  freedoms  in  how  they 
conduct  their  business  as  enjoyed  by  integrated  retailers  in  running  store  networks.  This 
policy  treatment  means  that  independent  retailer  groups  are  not  viewed  as  single 
organisations  but  instead  a  nexus  of  markets  contracts  to  be  regulated  with  policies 
developed  for  inter-organisational  vertical  and  horizontal  agreements.    Despite,  policy 
restrictions, independent retailer groups have managed to compete effectively in local retail 
markets  with  physical  stores  based  on  their  ability  to  adapt  quickly  to  differences  in  local 
competition and demand.  However,  uncertainty over what practices are or not permissible 
restricts  the  ability  and  agility  of  independent  retailer  groups  to  respond  effectively  to  the 
new  competitive  challenges  posed  in  the  new  retail era  as  omnichannel  retailing  comes  to 
the  fore  in  European  retail  markets  where  tight  coordination  between  online  and  offline 
retail operations are essential. 

3.A  EU Competition Policy Principles 

3.1  Retail chains pervade and dominate the retail scene in Europe, with well-recognised banners 

and trade names that have spread beyond their original local and regional basis to become 

national and international branded retail chains.  However, to the outside eye, their  brand 

consistency  may  give  the  perception  of  a  single  integrated  organisation.    While  this  might 

evidently  be  the  case  with  fully  integrated  multiple  retailers,  they  are  not  the  only 

organisational  forms  operating  retail  store  networks.    The  stores  could  be  run  by 

independent retailers, as part of a voluntary or cooperative group, or by franchised outlets 

through a business-format franchise system or manufacturer-led dealership network. 

3.2  Understanding the differences between these organisational forms is important because it 

helps  appreciate  their  different  operational  goals  and  functions,  as  well  as  their  roles  in 

creating  economic  and  social  value.    Moreover,  understanding  the  purpose,  nature  and 

operation  of  the  internal  functioning  of  the  chains  is  fundamental  to  understanding  how 

these  groups  work  and  operate  in  markets,  why  they  have  become  established,  and  how 

they can continue to thrive and prosper if given appropriate legal and regulatory treatment.  

3.3 

The  defining  and  distinguishing  feature  of  independent  retailer  groups  is  their  use  and 

reliance  on  vertical  and/or  horizontal  arrangements  between  legally  separate  entities  but 

26 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Final Report 

Levelling the Playing Field 2.0 

serving  as  integrated  parts  in  a  unified  or  cohesive  system.    The  fundamental  difference 

between integrated retailers and independent retailer groups is down to ownership/control 

– the former is under single integrated ownership/control and the latter is under separable 

ownership/control  of  the  individual  outlets  in  the  store  network  from  the  central 

organisation.  However, in terms of economic functions, they perform in the same way as in 

purchasing  goods  for  resale  to  consumers,  i.e.  as  retail  distributors.    Yet,  EU  competition 

policy treatment focuses entirely on the separable ownership/control aspect of independent 

retailer  groups  and  so  does  not  recognise  them  in  terms  of  being  a  unified  or  cohesive 

system,  but  instead  as  a  nexus  of  market  contracts  amongst  legally  separate parties.    The 

consequence  is  that  EU  competition  policy  applies  rules  about  horizontal  and  vertical 

agreements  to  these  unified  or  cohesive  systems  as  if  the  different  parts  are  simply 

operating  as  transactional  relationships.    For  example,  insofar  as  independent  retailer 

groups  have  more  than  one  member  active  in  the  same  geographical  retail  market,  EU 

competition policy restricts their freedom to apply practices open to integrated retailers. 

3.4 

In  contrast,  national  policy  and  the  treatment  by  national  competition  authorities  often 

gives specific recognition and understanding of the economic, social and cultural importance 

of independent retailer groups as a dynamic and pro-competitive force, which promote and 

support  entrepreneurship  and  advance  efficiency 

through  cooperation,  collective 

responsibility and mutual support.  The national policy approaches have scope to be more 

nuanced in understanding and appreciating the historical development of such organisations 

and how they serve as a competitive force to suit consumers’ needs in their country context.  

In different instances, national law and national policy decisions give special consideration to 

independent retailer groups, taking account of their market position and what they provide 

consumers, while applying regulation in a way that safeguards competition to the benefit of 

consumers  yet  providing 

independent  groups  necessary  freedom  and  flexibility 

in 

coordinating and controlling their internal relations. 

3.5  Whereas national policy might recognise the special hybrid character of independent retailer 

groups,  EU  competition policy  seems to  treat ownership/control  purely  in black and white 

terms, viewing business relationships in dichotomous terms of either ownership/control (so 

integrated) or non-ownership/control (so contractual).  However, such a dichotomy does not 

take due account of the practicality of how partnership systems work and create economic 

and social value – whether under single ownership/control or multiple ownership/control. 

27 

 
 
 
 
 
Final Report 

Levelling the Playing Field 2.0 

3.6  Accordingly, at the core of EU competition policy is a focus on ownership/control that does 

not  recognise  that  in  the  case  of  many  independent  retailer  groups  it  is  relationships  that 

bind organisations and which are fundamental to the success of connecting different parts 

of business operations.   

3.7  However, the distinctions drawn between ownership/control and cooperation have another 

consequence and that is a perception that cooperation between parties in the same trade is 

more often than not  about collusion for an anticompetitive purpose.  This view has a long 

history  in  economics  and  can  even  be  traced  back  to  the  writings  of  Adam  Smith  in  The 

Wealth  of  Nations  (1776)  with  his  much  quoted  saying  that  “people  of  the  same  trade 

seldom  meet  together,  even  for  merriment  and  diversion,  but  the  conversation  ends  in  a 

conspiracy against the public, or in some contrivance to raise prices”.19   

3.8  Unfortunately,  when  translated  into  policy  sentiment,  what  the  collusion  perspective 

overlooks  is  the  far  more  important  statements  from  Smith  about  how  wealth  is  created 

through cooperation and the division of labour in driving economic progress: “The greatest 

improvement in the productive powers of labour, and the greatest part of skill, dexterity, and 

judgment with which it is any where directed, or applied, seem to have been the effects of 

the  division  of  labour”.20    This  is  precisely  how  cooperatives  and  voluntary  membership 

groups  work,  and  indeed  how  all  modern  business  organisations  function,  because  it  is 

through  specialisation  and  the  division  of  responsibilities  in  how  efficiency  and  value 

creation  is  derived.    To  be  clear,  this  has  nothing  to  do  with  common  and  single 

ownership/control, only in how business functions are connected and interrelate.   

3.9  Accordingly, there  is at  the  heart of EU competition policy a  problem in the application of 

Article  101(1)  of  TFEU  in  viewing  all  restrictive  agreements  between  parts  of  business 

operations not under common ownership and control as first and foremost anti-competitive 

irrespective  of  their  context.  Even  the  term  “restrictive  agreement”  is  pejorative  in  this 

context because it implies the intention to deny or limit the freedom of actions, whereas for 

business operations this is about organisation and management of relationships.  This might 

have been less evidently a problem in the previous policy regime of a form-based approach 

to  competition  policy,  which  had  the  flexibility  to  recognise  special  cases  of  different 

19 Adam Smith, An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations (Book I, Ch. 10, ¶ 82), 
1776. 
20 Id, Chapter I, p. 7. 

28 

 
 
 
 
 
                                                      
Final Report 

Levelling the Playing Field 2.0 

business  forms  in  different  industry  contexts  (i.e.  under  the  previous  block  exemption 

system).  However, the shift to an effects-based assessment exposes flawed thinking if the 

view  is  that  all  restrictive  agreements  except  between  common  owned  and  controlled 

business  operations  are  inherently  anti-competitive,  unless  proven  otherwise.    This  is 

especially so in respect of all vertical relations analysis where the entire economic theory on 

the subject is built on producer-retailer relationships with little or no economic analysis on 

horizontal and vertical relations inside retail organisations.21   

3.10  At  issue  is  the  application  of  EU  competition  policy  in  failing  to  make  an  appropriate 

distinction between inter- and intra- organisational relationships.  Regrettably, the latter are 

simply treated the same as the former in being viewed as merely contracting relationships 

between  separate  legal  parties,  when  in  fact  they  are  about  operations  in  a  unified  and 

cohesive  system  that  are  integral  to  the  organisation.    The  overlooked  point  is  that 

independent  retailer  groups  are  organisations,  where  the  parties 

involved 

in  the 

unified/cohesive  system work to the same  ends, having the same  values, and wanting the 

same  success  for  their  brand.  22  This  does  not  make  them  integrated  single  firms  but  still 

means that the parties in the group function within a broad hybrid organisational structure 

that  is  fundamentally  different  as  to  how  “external”  trade  works,  between  fundamentally 

separate organisations, and for which EU competition policy is designed. 

3.11 

In  this  regard,  the  “effects-based”  approach  in  EU  competition  policy  is  fundamentally 

centred on the  principles of  industrial  organisation  economics,  in  assessing  competition  in 

inter-organisational contracting and trading relationships, but is designed without sufficient 

consideration of internal organisation economics, so does not adequately appreciate intra-

21 For a comprehensive review of this economic theory on vertical agreements, highlighting that the 
entire  focus  of  this  literature  is  on  the  contracting  between  entirely  separate  producer  and  retailer 
businesses, see Patrick Rey and Thibaud Verge, “Economics of Vertical Restraints”, in Paulo Buccirossi, 
Handbook of Antitrust Economics, MIT Press, Chapter 9, pp. 353-390, 2008. 
22  The  focus  in  this  report  is  on  independent  retailer  groups  as  unified/cohesive  systems  which  can 
include  their  function  as  “buying  groups”,  in  representing  independent  retailers,  but  these  are 
different  to  “buying  alliances”,  which  might  involve  different  national  integrated  retailers  pooling 
their purchases together to generate cost  savings through EU-wide negotiations.  On how the latter 
work  and  perform,  see  the  empirical  analysis  undertaken  by  I.  Geyskens,  K.  Gielens  and  S.  Wuyts, 
“United we stand: The impact of buying groups on retailer productivity,” Journal of Marketing, Vol. 79 
(4), 2015, pp. 16-33.  

29 

 
 
 
 
                                                      
Final Report 

Levelling the Playing Field 2.0 

organisational  relationships  that  are  relevant  to  hybrid  types  of  organisations 

like 

independent retailers groups.23 

3.12  The  consequence  is  that  the  application  of  EU  competition  policy  does  not  give  due 

recognition  to  the  fact  that  independent  retailer  groups  can  be  retailer  organisations  that 

operate  as  single  unified/cohesive  systems  based  on  ongoing  relationships  which  are 

integral  to  the  organisation  and  not  mere  contracting  relations  between  independent 

parties.    Yet,  the  policy  treatment  is  that  their  intra-organisational  relationships  are 

equivalent to inter-organisational contracting and control mechanisms, which they are not.24  

Instead, policy should recognise the intrinsic need for independent retailer groups to act as 

unified/cohesive  systems  and  not  treat  their  internal  operations  and  coordination  on  the 

same basis as market exchanges.  

3.13  Thus,  the  deficiency  of  the  current  EU  policy  approach  has  been  not  to  draw  a  careful 

distinction between inter-organisational relationships and intra-organisational relationships.  

The  upshot  is  that  existing  EU  policy  discriminates  against  independent  retailer  groups.  

These groups are denied the same liberal policy treatment afforded to integrated retailers, 

which are free (unless they are deemed to be in a dominant position) to operate their stores 

exactly  how  they  like.    In  contrast,  independent  retailer  groups  have  to  be  more  careful 

when  grouping  their  activities  if  their  market  share  exceeds  15%  when  deemed  as 

representing a horizontal agreement or 30% when viewed as a vertical agreement.  Insofar 

as they have more than one member operating in the same geographical retail market, they 

are  also  prevented  from  using  the  same  marketing  practices  that  integrated  retailers  are 

freely  allowed  to  use,  like  common  prices  and  joint  marketing.    Such  unfair  and 

discriminatory treatment  certainly does  not  allow  for a level playing field  and so  serves to 

distort rather enhance competition. Although, seldom applied in practice, the perceived EU 

competition  policy  approach  creates  uncertainty  as  to  the  boundaries  of  permissible  co-

operation for independent retailer groups.  

23  For  extensive  details  of  the  literature  and  scope  of  internal  organisation  economics,  see  Robert 
Gibbons  and  John  Roberts,  The  Handbook  of  Organizational  Economics.  Princeton  University  Press, 
2013 (noting that Chapter 23 specifically covers hybrid modes of organisation that fall neither under 
pure market relationships nor within hierarchical “firm boundaries”). 
24  On  these  difference,  see,  for  example,  C.  Mena,  A.  Humphries  and  R.  Wilding,  “A  Comparison  of 
Inter‐  and  Intra‐organizational  Relationships,”  International  Journal  of  Physical  Distribution  and 
Logistics Management, Vol. 39 (9), 2009, pp. 762–784.  

30 

 
 
 
 
 
                                                      
Final Report 

Levelling the Playing Field 2.0 

3.14 

In contrast to the EU approach, which fails to make appropriate distinctions, national policy 

may  give  recognition  to  the  reason  why  independent  retailer  groups  emerged  and  forged 

relationships  as  single  unified/cohesive  systems  by  the  need  for  efficiencies  to  spur  value 

creation and in response to the pressure of stiffening competition.  In particular, there can 

be  national  law  recognition  that  such  groups  provide  their  member  traders  with  joint 

buying,  logistics  and  marketing  benefits,  whether  through  membership  in  buying  groups, 

voluntary  associations,  symbol  groups,  retail  cooperatives,  or  vertical  chains,  with  the 

common  element  that  their  relationship  is  contractual  and  consensual  in  lieu  of  single 

ownership/control.    For  example,  this  recognition  is  provided  in  France  through  its 

Commercial Code – see boxed Exhibits C.3 and C.4 in Appendix C.   

3.15  This more favourable national policy treatment rests on seeing such  group organisation  as 

not about collusion and conspiracy to raise prices, deny consumers good value for money, 

and  provide  a  poor  service,  but  fundamentally  about  seeking  the  exact  opposite  through 

efficiencies to lower prices, increase value for money, and provide a better quality of service 

and  improved  choice.    Nonetheless,  the  concern  is  the  primacy of  EU  policy over  national 

policy and how national policy is expected to follow and adopt EU policy, and so the risk that 

the special recognition afforded to independent retailer groups will be lost. 

3.B  Different organisational forms of retail chains in Europe 

3.16  To  be  clear  about  the  types  of  organisations  under  discussion  in  this  report,  it  might  be 

helpful  to  draw  out  the  key  features  of  the  different  organisational  forms  of  retail  store 

networks presently operating in Europe. 

3.17  A  simple  classification  based  on  ownership,  governance  and  control  differences  suggests 

four broad  organisational forms of store chain  networks: integrated retailers;  independent 

retailer groups; franchise systems; and hybrid groups.  The boxed Exhibit 3.1 below provides 

a summary of each of these four different forms, of which there are three main variants of 

independent  retailer  groups  as  voluntary  associations  or  symbol  groups,  retailer 

cooperatives, and vertical chain networks. 

Exhibit 3.1 – Different retail organisational forms by ownership and control 

Four  main  types  of  retail  chains  are  evident  in  Europe,  characterised  by  different 
ownership,  governance  and  operational  control  structures:  (1)  integrated  retailers;  (2) 
independent  retailer  groups;  (3)  franchise  systems;  and  (4)  hybrid  groups  (such  as  joint 

31 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Final Report 

Levelling the Playing Field 2.0 

ventures, alliances, cross-shareholdings, or a mix of organisational types).  

1.  Integrated  retailers  –  otherwise  known  as  multiple  retailers  or  capital  chains  -  are 
  They  are  fully 
integrated  chain-store  networks  under  single  ownership/control. 
integrated in both a horizontal sense (across different retail outlets) and a vertical sense 
(from wholesale supply to the stores).  Individual outlets have store managers rather than 
independent store owners.  Ownership/control of the integrated retailer can be through 
private or public companies, state control (e.g. for liquor stores), consumers cooperatives 
(i.e.  owned  by  member  customers),  workers  cooperatives  (i.e.  owned  by  the  employed 
workers  as  partners),  or  hybrid  worker-consumer  cooperatives  (like  Eroski  in  Spain).  
Integrated retailers represent the dominant form of retailing in Europe, with international 
corporate  retailers  like  Carrefour,  Tesco,  Aldi,  Schwartz/Lidl,  Wal-Mart,  Amazon,  and 
Metro,  and  consumer  cooperatives  like  Migros,  Co-operative  Group  (UK),  S-Group 
(Finland), and Coop Italia.   

2. Independent retailer groups – generally take one of three main forms: 

i.  Voluntary  associations  and  symbol  groups 

(Einkaufsring 

-  buying  group; 
Einkaufsgemeinschaft - voluntary association) – are often wholesaler-led associations 
whereby  independent  retailers become voluntary members (not  tied by ownership 
links,  long-term  franchises  or  other  long-term contractual  relations).   These  groups 
might provide different functions to different members, serving foremost as buying 
groups  but  also  in  promoting  a  common  banner  and  brand  name  (symbol). 
Independent  retail  members  buy  supplies  through  a  specific  wholesaler,  who  in 
return  for  the  buying  and  marketing  benefits  pays  a  monthly/annual  fee  and/or  a 
percentage  of  takings  to  the  symbol  group.    Such  groups  exist  in  a  wide  range  of 
retail sectors including grocery (e.g. SPAR), sports goods (e.g. INTERSPORT), florists 
(e.g. Interflora), toys (e.g. Toymaster), and electrical goods (e.g. Euronics). 

ii.  Retailer  cooperatives  (Les  sociétés  coopératives  de  commerçants  –  traders’ 
cooperative;  einkaufskooperation  –  buying  cooperative;  einkaufsgenossenschaft  – 
cooperative retailer organisation) - relate to cooperatives where retail operations are 
separately  owned  by  members  but  they  coordinate  their  buying  to  seek  discounts 
from bulk buying and additionally may adopt common retail branding.  The common 
element is that members have a dual role as both customers of the cooperative (in 
buying  goods)  as  well  as  co-owners  (through  share  ownership).    Such  groups  are 
important  in  France  (e.g.  E.  Leclerc,  ITM  Intermarche,  and  Système  U)  and  in 
Germany (e.g. EDEKA and REWE Group).  This retail chain form is different and not to 
be confused with other co-operative forms in retailing which act as integrated chains 
like  a  (non-for-profit)  consumer-owned  cooperative  societies  or  worker-owned 
cooperatives.  

iii.  Vertical chain networks - where the wholesale operation owns the stores operated 
by  independent  retail  entrepreneurs  as  with  Kesko  in  Finland,  or  where  there  is 
partial  integration  through  co-ownership  as  with  ICA  in  Sweden  (such  that  new 
stores are owned by the company but the retailer can later buy and own the retail 
business once the initial investment is paid off). In these networks, the  central unit 

32 

 
 
Final Report 

Levelling the Playing Field 2.0 

vertically manages, through vertical chain agreements, the chain operations and the 
store site network, develops retail concepts and provides centralised services (such 
as  sourcing  and  digital  retail  services)  to  the  retail  entrepreneurs,  who  in  turn 
implement the chain concept and are responsible for store management, customer 
satisfaction,  personnel  and  business  profitability.    The  retail  entrepreneurs  tailor 
their  stores  to  meet  the  needs of  local  customers.   Management  boards  represent 
the  entrepreneurs’  interests  and  retailer  associations  help  promote  cooperation 
amongst the retailers. 

3. Retail franchises  and dealerships  -  normally refer to “business format  franchises” (as 
opposed to a “wholesaler-retailer franchise”, as might be used to describe a symbol group 
like  SPAR)  or  manufacturer/brand  “dealerships”.    The  latter  is  common,  for  example,  in 
the  car  sector  where  specific  competition  policy  and  block  exemption  rules  apply  to 
selective and exclusive distribution arrangements involved in car supply  and distribution 
in the EU.  More generally for franchising arrangements, the franchisor grants permission 
for the franchisee (the independent retailer) to sell its products or services as a means of 
selective  distribution.    The  franchisor  also  provides  a  proven  method  of  trading,  plus 
support  and  advice  in  setting  up  and  operating  the business  (e.g.  Benetton,  Body  Shop, 
Mango,  and  Swarovski).    The  contractual  arrangement  allows  the  franchisor  to  obtain 
distribution at the retail level through its dealers while maintaining vertical control in how 
the retail service and its goods are merchandised. Even so, franchisors may be limited in 
the extent  to which they can exercise  complete  control over franchisees.  Thus, while  a 
franchisor may be able to impose certain restrictions on a franchisee to protect property 
rights  and ensure  necessary  investments  are made, it cannot  legally tie  the purchase  of 
inputs  to  use  of  the  franchise.    Equally,  while  the  franchisor  may  specify  the  quality  of 
inputs to be used, a franchisee must be free to buy from a third party that can meet the 
specific standards of the inputs.  Also, a franchisor cannot legally determine the prices set 
by  the  franchisee,  nor  impose  territorial  restrictions  that  would  have  the  effect  of 
segmenting the EU into isolated national or regional markets. 

4. Hybrid arrangements – which can take a combination of hybrid forms, for example 

a)  retail joint ventures (where there is co-ownership from two or more retail groups 

for a retail chain);  

b)  alliances  (such  as  cross-border  buying  groups  like  AMS  and  EMD  where  several 
retail  groups  pool  their  purchasing  volumes  in  negotiating  with  international 
suppliers);  

c)  multiple cross-shareholding arrangements (e.g. NorgesGruppen);  
d)  a  mix  of  organisational  types  (e.g.  Booker  as  a  UK  cash  &  carry  chain  and 
wholesaler supplying independent retailers buying the Londis and Budgens retail 
chains from Musgrave in 2015, but now itself merged with the integrated retailer 
Tesco;  or  the  Co-operative  Group’s  takeover  of  the  independent  retailer  group 
Nisa in the UK). 

33 

 
 
 
 
Final Report 

Levelling the Playing Field 2.0 

3.18  The examples of independent retailer groups identified in Exhibit 3.1 are at the end of the 

co-operative  spectrum  where  they  tend  to  operate  as  branded  retail  chains  but  with 

somewhat different forms of ownership and control.25  However, these do not describe all 

independent retailer groups.  In particular, there can be different types and levels of retail 

co-operation,  which  can  adapt  and  evolve  over  time.    For  example,  the  origins  of  many 

branded  independent  retailer  groups  may  well  have  started  (and  perhaps  even  remain 

today) as a buying group, then developing into a co-operative business form as co-operation 

on the range of services beyond joint purchasing increased over time, and ending up as a co-

operative retail chain with a shared brand name.  In this evolutionary process, which not all 

groups  and  associations  of  independent  retailers  have  necessarily  followed,  the  levels  of 

vertical,  horizontal,  internal  and  strategic  integration  tend  to  increase  through  each  stage.  

For illustration, Table 3.1 draws on Kennedy (2016), who provides an extensive review of the 

different types of retail co-operatives and their identifying characteristics, to summarise the 

differences for each of the three main types or stages of retail co-operation. 

Table 3.1. Types of retail co-operation 

Dimensions  

Retailers’ buying 
group 

Objectives 

Cost advantages 

Activities 

Purchasing 

Retailers’ co-operative  Retailers’ co-

operative retail chain 

Cost and 
differentiation 
advantages 

Purchasing and 
services 

Cost and 
differentiation 
advantages 

Purchasing and 
services 

Formality 

Enforcement 

Vertical, horizontal, 
internal and strategic 
integration 26 

Low 

Medium 

High 

None, social or 
contractual 

Social or contractual 

Contractual and social 

Low 

Medium 

High 

Source: Kennedy (2016).27 

25  For  further  summary  details  on  these  and  other  leading  independent  retailer  groups,  see  boxed 
Exhibit C.1 in Appendix C. 
26  In  this  specific  context,  “vertical  integration”  refers  to  the  integration  of  the  supply  chain  of  a 
retailer,  while  “horizontal  integration”  refers  to  the  adoption  of  a  shared  identity  between  the 
retailers  culminating  in  a  shared  brand  of  stores.  “Internal  integration”  regards  the  level  of  shared 
decision-making  where  more  internal  integration  would  show  in  more  centralised  decision-making, 
while “strategic integration” refers to the amount that a retailer considers the other retailers in their 
strategy formation.  

34 

 
 
 
 
 
                                                      
Final Report 

Levelling the Playing Field 2.0 

3.19 

In practice, the emergence and development of independent retail groups has varied  quite 

noticeably  across  different  EU  countries  and  across  different  retail  sectors. 

  The 

organisational  form,  structure  and  purpose  of  these  independent  retailer  groups  often 

comes  down  to  their  historical  development,  the  needs  of  the  market  being  served,  the 

nature of competition, and the extent of opportunities for collaboration, as well as national 

level laws and policy.  

3.20 

In historical terms, independent retailer groups have been a key feature of most European 

retail markets for well over a century.28  They have witnessed and been part of the history of 

these markets and have themselves evolved and adapted to changing market circumstances.  

These  groups  have  been  intrinsic  to  the  development  of  these  markets  and  have  helped 

ensure  that  competition  has  prevailed  over  time.    Their  presence  has  ensured  that 

consumers have genuine retail choice in local markets and, even in the remotest rural areas, 

continue to be served well across whole countries.  The challenge now facing these groups is 

to move with and adapt to new retail developments, particularly for online retailing where 

centralisation and coordination is essential, but where legal restrictions discriminate against 

independent  retailer  groups  simply  because  of  their  ownership  structure,  with  their  store 

network contractually linked rather than ownership linked as with integrated retailers.29  

3.C  Group unity and identity 

3.21  The key distinguishing feature between an integrated retailer and a retailer group is about 

who owns,  runs  and  controls  the  stores.    In  an  integrated  retailer,  store managers  follow, 

often  with  little  discretion  of  their  own,  the  (top-down)  management  instructions  coming 

from  central  office  on  all  elements  of  the  in-store  marketing  mix,  i.e.  covering  products, 

prices, promotion and placement.  In an independent retailer group, it is the store owner or 

retail entrepreneur operating the store (if the store is centrally owned) who makes most of 

27    Ann-Marie  Kennedy,  “Re-imagining  retailers’  co-operatives,  International  Review  of  Retail, 
Distribution and Consumer Research, Vol. 26 (3), 2016, pp. 304-322. 
28  For  a  global  perspective  and  academic  literature  review  on  independent  retailer  groups  in  food 
retailing,  see  Flavia  Angeli  Ghisi  Nielsen,  Marcos  Roberto  Luppe  and  José  Augusto  Giesbrecht  da 
Silveira  (2014),  “Horizontal  Alliances  among  Independents  and  Non-integrated  Food  Retailers:  A 
Worldwide  Analysi,”  International  Journal  of  Business  and  Commerce,  Vol.  3,  No.10,  pp.  21-50 
(https://www.ijbcnet.com/3-10/IJBC-14-3907.pdf). 
29 As an illustration of how independent retailer groups have evolved over time as the  national retail 
environment has changed, see boxed Exhibit C.2 in Appendix C which considers the development of 
such groups in France over the past century and more. 

35 

 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                        
Final Report 

Levelling the Playing Field 2.0 

the  retail  offer  decisions,  guided  by  suggestions  and  recommendations  from  the  central 

office  on  the  marketing  mix,  but  expected  to  follow  the  group’s  approach  to  ensure 

consistency  and  equality  across  the  store  network  to  promote  a  common  identity.      Thus 

while the internal relationships may be different, what they have in common is that they are 

integral and internal to the same unified/cohesive system. 

3.22  With  this  organisational  perspective  in  mind,  and  to  help  clarify  the  nature  of  objectives, 

ownership  and  control  of  these  different  business  forms,  Table  3.2  draws  on  the 

classification analysis by Kennedy (2016) to illustrate the organisational differences between 

independent  retailer  groups  (represented  by  a  retailers’  cooperative)  and  integrated 

retailers, whether the latter are in the form of  a consumer co-operative (i.e. an integrated 

retailer owned by consumers) or a corporate retail chain (i.e. an integrated retailer owned 

by  shareholder  investors).    In  the  practice,  the  lines  may  be  more  blurred  when  the 

independent retailer group has a combination of ownership by retail members and external 

investors  (such  as  when  the  group  has  a  stock  market  listing),  but  the  key  differentiating 

factor will still be the independence of retail members in making key operational decisions 

for their own stores. 

Table 3.2. Organisational differences between independent retailer groups and integrated 
retail chains 

Type of retail 
chain 

Independent retailer 
group 

Integrated retail chain 

Specific form 

Retailers’ cooperative 

Consumer cooperative 

Corporate retail chain 

Members 

Purpose 

Objectives 

Retailers – defined 
membership 

Consumers – open 
membership 

N/A 

Group buying through to 
cooperative retail chain 

Community retailing and 
social movement 

Corporate retail chain 

Competitive cost 
advantage through to 
competitive differentiation 
for profit maximisation 

Maximise customer 
service and contribute to 
the community 

Maximise shareholder 
returns 

Ownership 

Member owned 

Member owner 

Investor owned 

Control 

Funding 

Returns 

Democratic - by member 
vote 

Democratic - by member 
vote 

Hired board of directors 
and shareholders, based 
on their investment level 

Equity of members 

Equity of members 

Capital markets 

Reinvest or shared 
between members 

Reinvest or shared 
between members 

To shareholders 

36 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Final Report 

Levelling the Playing Field 2.0 

Source: Adapted from Kennedy (2016).30 

3.23 

In contrast, the comparison between independent retailer groups with franchising systems is 

somewhat different.  Here, the stores may be independently owned but the relationship and 

control  is  different.    There  are  four  key  differences between  the  two  retail  forms.    Firstly, 

while  an  independent  retailer  group  is  fundamentally  an  organisation  with  power-sharing 

mechanisms,  franchising  is  more  about  a  system  of  vertical  control  where  the  franchisor 

determines the terms of the relationship to its franchisees.   Thus, while power in the former 

may be balanced, the latter is usually asymmetric.31  Secondly, retailers in the independent 

retailer group are members of the group, so hold dual roles as both customers of the central 

function  and  co-owners  with  a  strong  voice.    In  contrast,  franchisees  typically  are  just 

customers of the franchisor with no ownership and so have relatively a weak voice.  Thirdly, 

the nature of the independent retailer group is about an ongoing and indefinite relationship 

with no fixed end date, whereas franchise relationships are generally time-limited contracts 

with break clauses and formal processes for contractual renewal.  Fourthly, membership of 

an independent retailer group is often voluntary, so the member can freely leave, whereas 

in  a  franchise  relationship  the  franchisee  is  always  contractually  bound  by  the  franchise 

contract so generally does not have this freedom.  

3.24  The differences between independent retailer groups and franchise systems, though, might 

run deeper in relation to the business culture, where the former can be quite democratic in 

its process and decision-making, and mixed with heterarchical (unranked horizontal power), 

hierarchical  (top-down  vertical  power),  as  well  as  bottom-up  processes,  while  the  latter 

might  be  predominantly  hierarchical  and  more  silo-based  (i.e.  little  interaction  across  the 

system with other franchisees).   These differences are summed up by Cassou et al. (2017) 

drawing the following distinctions between a retail cooperative and a franchise system:32 

“A retail cooperative consists of an assembly of retailers who decide together to develop 
a  retail  business  under  the  same  banner  and  to  organize  together  their  procurement 

30    Ann-Marie  Kennedy,  “Re-imagining  retailers’  co-operatives,  International  Review  of  Retail, 
Distribution and Consumer Research, Vol. 26 (3), 2016, pp. 304-322. 
31 The consequences of the asymmetry in franchising  systems is explored in the report  Franchising, 
Policy  Department  A,  Directorate  for  Internal  Policies,  European  Parliament,  IP/A/IMCO/2015-05, 
April 2015. 
32  Fabrice  Cassou,  Gérard  Cliquet  and  Rozenn  Perrigot,  “Uniformity  in  Collective  Entrepreneurship: 
The  Case  of  Food  Retail  Cooperatives  in  France”,  in  Management  and  Governance  of  Networks: 
Franchising, Cooperatives, and Strategic Alliances, edited by G.W.J. Hendrikse, G. Cliquet, T. Ehrmann, 
and J. Windsperger, pp.193-211, 2017, Springer International Publishing. 

37 

 
 
 
                                                      
Final Report 

Levelling the Playing Field 2.0 

system and many other activities in  the course of the growth of the organization. Even 
though it is difﬁcult for a customer to distinguish between retail cooperative banners and 
franchise  ones,  these  two  systems,  franchising  and  retail  cooperatives,  are  totally 
different. A franchised system relies on the initial enterprise of a franchisor who attracts 
franchisees to implement the new concept. In such an arrangement, the franchisor is the 
owner,  even  though  she/he  should  be  able  to  convince  franchisees  to  follow  chain 
policies  when  changes  occur.  A  retail  cooperative  is  an  entrepreneurial  democratic 
system  owned  by  an  association  of  members…,  where  every  decision  is  made  in  a 
democratic  way  under  a  basic  principle:  one  person,  one  vote.  The  main  difference 
between a retail cooperative and a franchise chain stems in the power-sharing system.” 

3.25  These  characterisations  of  the  differences  between  independent  retailer  groups  and 

franchise  systems  may  be  overstated  or  unduly  simplified,  but  they  point  to  a  generally 

closer integration in independent  retailer groups as hybrid organisations where  ownership 

may  be  more  diffuse  but  control 

is 

less  hierarchical  than 

in  franchise  systems.33  

Nevertheless,  both  types  of  retail  systems  face  the  challenge  of  different  legal  and  policy 

treatment  compared  to  integrated  retailers  and  thus  both  business  form  can  be  put  at  a 

potential  competitive  disadvantage  relative  to  the  favourable  policy  treatment  given  to 

integrated  retailers.  Moreover,  independent  retailer  groups  may  themselves  use  or  be 

involved in franchise systems for some of their operations (e.g. operating car dealerships or 

running international retail chain operations on a franchise basis rather than an independent 

retail member model). 

3.D  Processes to maintain network uniformity 

3.26  The development and existence of independent retailer groups, as with any network of retail 

stores,  depends  fundamentally  on  maintaining  uniformity  to  promote  and  preserve  brand 

integrity  and  values.    Respecting  the  core  components  of  the  concept  is  essential  to 

33 There is no common European definition of franchising and franchising agreements differ from one 
business  to  another.    However,  a  key  feature  of  such  relationships  is  a  contractual  partnership 
concluded on a voluntary basis between entrepreneurs or natural or legal persons that are legally and 
financially independent  of each other, whereby one party (the franchisor) grants to the other party 
(the franchisee) the right to operate his franchising formula, name, and trademarks, and shares know-
how,  drawing  on  the  franchisor’s  technical  and  organisational  expertise  and  assistance  for  the 
duration  of  the  agreement,  where  customers  rely  upon  the  unity  of  the  franchising  system,  the 
intention  of  both  the  franchisor  and  the  franchisee  being  to  allow  for  the  rapid  acquisition  of  new 
markets  with  limited  investment  and  an  increased  chance  of  success.    For  further  details,  see  the 
in  the  retail  sector 
discussion 
(2016/2244(INI) (http://www.europarl.europa.eu/sides/getDoc.do?pubRef=-//EP//TEXT+REPORT+A8-
2017-0199+0+DOC+XML+V0//EN). 

in  the  European  Parliament  on  the  function  of  franchising 

38 

 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                      
Final Report 

Levelling the Playing Field 2.0 

maintaining uniformity so that the consumer can ﬁnd a common image, design, and service 

experience in any store under the same brand.  The brand image then has to be consistent 

all over the brand’s properties, whether they are independently or centrally owned.  

3.27  Even in stable markets, maintaining uniformity can be a major business challenge.  However, 

in dynamic and turbulent markets, this is both more challenging and more important for the 

sake  of  customer  retention  and  ensuring  customer  satisfaction.    In  an  integrated  retail 

business, top-down management instruction can completely control how individual stores in 

the  network  operate.    However,  in  independent  retailer  groups,  such  top-down  control  is 

not  feasible  given  that  the  stores  are  run  by  independent  retailers.    Contracts  between 

members  and  the  central  organisation  may  go  some  way  towards  ensuring  compliance  in 

behaviour, but the  individuality and freedom enjoyed by independent  retail entrepreneurs 

means  that  there  needs  to  be  other  mechanisms  in  place  to  ensure  group  coherence, 

uniformity, effort and shared belief. 

3.28 

Independent retailer groups strengthen their interdependency through the formalisation of 

shared  procedures  for  the  monitoring,  control,  and  harmonisation  of  their  business 

practices. Outwardly, such as to the consumer, this means that the group’s operations may 

be  difficult  to  distinguish  from  integrated  retailers  (i.e.  hierarchical  organisations  with 

managed  stores  controlled  by  a  central  headquarters).    Yet  internally,  cooperation,  rather 

than just management, is critical.  

3.29  Horizontal  cooperation  may  have  been  the  origin  of  the  group’s  common  centralised 

structures  (covering  purchasing,  marketing,  communication,  funding, 

logistics,  and 

information systems as common policies).  However, coordination between these common 

centralised structures and each retail store relies on a vertical form of cooperation. Thus a 

dual approach, both horizontal and vertical, may be in place to support cooperation, which is 

especially evident in retailer cooperatives.  In practice, top-down centralised processes are 

present, but the voice and influence of the independent retailers also comes bottom-up or 

across  as  decentralised  processes,  and  additionally  there  can  be  a  mix  of  centralised  and 

decentralised  processes.    Cassou  et  al.  (2017)  assign  three  specific  forms  to  each  of  these 

three types of processes, so nine in total, as shown in Table 3.3.34  They argue that this set of 

34  Fabrice  Cassou,  Gérard  Cliquet  and  Rozenn  Perrigot,  “Uniformity  in  Collective  Entrepreneurship: 
The  Case  of  Food  Retail  Cooperatives  in  France”,  in  Management  and  Governance  of  Networks: 
Franchising, Cooperatives, and Strategic Alliances, edited by G.W.J. Hendrikse, G. Cliquet, T. Ehrmann, 
and J. Windsperger, pp.193-211, 2017, Springer International Publishing. 

39 

 
 
 
 
 
                                                      
Final Report 

Levelling the Playing Field 2.0 

nine  processes  are  especially  evident 

in 

independent  retailer  groups 

like  retailer 

cooperatives where the members have a clear dual status as both customers and co-owners 

of the central organisation. 

Table 3.3. Managing uniformity within retail cooperatives and independent store networks 

Centralised processes      
(top-down) 

Plural processes              
(mixed direction) 

Decentralised processes  
(bottom-up or across)  

Contracts  

Incentives  

Persuasion  

Solidarity  

Mimesis  

Trust  

Organisational commitment  

Enculturation  

Informal control 

Source: Cassou et al. (2017). 

3.30  The processes involved in each of these nine types can be summarised as follows: 

i.  The  contracts  process  involves  the  formalisation  of  explicit  rules  and  procedures  to 

supervise and control the behaviour of members in the group. This is to strengthen the 

organisation’s  consistency  without  necessarily  supervising  all  the  practices  and 

behaviours  of  its  members.  The  contracts  enable  a  formal  framework  to  organize 

relations  between  network  members,  where  there  is  typically  a  wide  range  of  legal 

documents governing the rights and responsibilities of network members.   

ii.  Incentives  may  play  an  important  central  process  role,  such  as  using  a  system  of 

discounts or an annual bonus based on the store’s maintained appearance, price policy, 

product availability, and employee training in reflecting concept uniformity.   

iii.  Persuasion processes may arise with upstream use where the members keep an eye on 

projects and store planning or downstream use where individual stores are monitored 

by ﬁeld audits, mystery shoppers, and automated management information systems to 

identify any deviation from the concept. 

iv.  Trust strengthens cohesion, cements the union of individuals, and means members can 

rely on each other. Inter-organisational trust is the trust in the  group itself by its own 

members, where each places itself in a position of vulnerability by becoming dependent 

on the group for its supplies and livelihood.  Interpersonal trust is the trust placed by 

individuals  upon  other  individuals  and,  in  this context,  between  peer members  in  the 

group.  

40 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Final Report 

Levelling the Playing Field 2.0 

v.  Organisational commitment processes can relate to affective commitment, where there 

is emotional commitment to and identiﬁcation with the organisation, so that members 

remain within the network because they want to. Continuance commitment can arise 

through the costs that a departure from the organization could create for the individual, 

based on the investments made, so members remain within the network because they 

feel  they  would  lose  too  much  if  they  left  it.    Normative  commitment  relates  to  the 

sense  of  loyalty  and  moral  obligation  to  remain  a  member  of  the  network  as  a  duty, 

recognising if members leave then it weakens the group so remaining members suffer.   

vi.  Informal  control  differs  from  formal  control.  It  consists  of  relational  governance 

through  consensus  and  actions  of  social  control,  following  the  principle  of  “one 

member, one vote.” The organisation  applies  pressure  to reduce  differences  between 

members and to reach consensus and support cohesion amongst members. 

vii.  Solidarity  relates  to  duties  and  mutual  responsibility,  recognising  shared  interests, 

defending  each  other’s  interests,  emphasising  team  work  and  team  spirit,  and  seeing 

each  other  as  equals  (despite  size  or  other  differences).    For  retailer  cooperatives, 

members  might  spend  around  a  third  their  time  working  for  the  cooperative  in 

technical  functions,  such  as  for  merchandising,  purchasing,  marketing,  logistics,  and 

information systems, where this act of solidarity reminds individual members that they 

belong  to  a  network  and  that  they  each  need  to  give  some  of  their  time  to  the 

functioning of the network.  

viii.  Mimesis corresponds to processes that help to drive consistency through commonality, 

imitation and herd behaviour  amongst members so they are aligned in their direction 

and intent.  For example, benchmarking analysis can help standardise the practices of 

stores  in  the  same  network  and  share  best  practice  to  generate  a  strong  emulation.  

Members can use social interactions with each other as part of their learning process by 

identifying and comparing themselves with each other.  

ix.  Enculturation processes help establish a common culture to reduce conflict and signal 

the kinds of members suited to the organisation, which in turn help recruit compatible 

individuals to become new members, such as store managers or family members who 

are already familiar and in tune with the principles and goals of the organisation.  

3.31  These  processes  work  in  tandem  to  bind  the  group  together  in  the  absence  of  central 

ownership control (as with an integrated retailer) or direct control through contracts (as in a 

41 

 
 
 
Final Report 

Levelling the Playing Field 2.0 

franchising system).  Ultimately,  though,  as  membership is voluntary, members can opt  to 

leave.    This  poses  a  problem  about  continuity  and  also  makes  the  independent  retailer 

groups fragile, as compared to the ownership and contractual binding that holds integrated 

retailers and franchise systems together.   

3.32 

In  these  circumstances,  it  is  helpful  if  there  are  mechanisms  available  that  provide  for  a 

smooth  entry  and  exit  process  for  members  joining  and  leaving  groups.  In  particular, 

because membership is intended as an ongoing basis, unlike franchise contracts which might 

be  for  a  fixed  period  (with  or  without  the  possibility  of  renewal),  legal  recognition  of  the 

indefinite nature of these groups is important.  Crucially, they are not simply about formal 

horizontal  and  vertical  agreements  in  the  way  that  competition  policy  tends  to  portray 

retailer networks and associations, but instead constitute a deeper relationship.   

3.E  Policy obstacles to cooperation for independent retailer groups 

3.33  Pooling  resources  in  independent  retailer  groups  helps  generate  scale  economies  in 

marketing,  procurement,  and  central  services  such  as  training,  store  planning  and  visual 

merchandising,  which  allow  retail  members  to  operate  more  efficiently  on  an  individual 

level.  This in turn allows the retailers to compete more effectively in their respective local 

markets,  with  competition  ensuring  that  consumers  benefit  through  lower  prices,  better 

services, and more choice.   

3.34  However, the extent to which groups can undertake activities on behalf of members is far 

from clear in most jurisdictions.  Apart from EU competition law, normally only national case 

law  provides  guidance  on  what  practices  independent  retailer  groups  can  undertake  and 

how they should be organised.  This can be particular problem when there is no established 

case  law  when  retail  markets  are  changing  rapidly.    A  key  issue  relates  to  online  selling, 

where the options for independent retailer groups are between having a centralised online 

sales  service,  with  supplies  handled  by  local  stores,  as  opposed  to  a  decentralised  system 

whereby individual stores operate their own websites.  The former has the benefit of group 

cohesion and consistency in representation to the consumer (e.g. in providing a single price 

for  a  good),  while  the  latter  can  prove  to  be  a  confusing  picture  where  there  might  be 

multiple prices for the same good.  As a good model for other national authorities to follow, 

the  French  authorities  have  amended  the  commercial  code  to  allow  centralised  online 

retailing through developing an online sales platform for the permitted activities of retailer 

42 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Final Report 

Levelling the Playing Field 2.0 

cooperatives in France – see boxed Exhibit C.4 at point 6 in Appendix C for details.  It would 

be  helpful  if  there  was  clarification  in  other  EU  member  states  as  to  what  practices  are 

permitted or not  permitted for independent retailer groups because  uncertainty will delay 

necessary  investments  and  consumers  may  suffer  as  consequence  from  ineffective  and 

inefficient services.  

Vertical control in retail groups 

3.35  Fully  integrated  chains  by  their  very  nature  already  enjoy  such  scale  benefits  as  well  as 

complete control over their operations at chain-level and individual store-level.  This means 

that an integrated chain can arrange and link up in a highly efficient manner all the business 

functions from procurement, logistics, marketing, merchandising, and store operations right 

through  to  sales  to  end  consumers.  Integrated  chains  thus  have  complete  control  over  all 

aspects  of  the  retail  proposition  both  centrally  (such  as  marketing,  product  range  choice, 

and store design to reflect the overall retail image) and locally at the individual store-level 

(to tailor decisions such as prices, category depth, and service levels to cater for local market 

conditions).  Crucially integrated retailers can set up, adjust and experiment with online and 

multichannel operations exactly how they like. 

3.36 

In  contrast,  independent  retailer  groups  are  limited  in  the  extent  of  their  control.  

Independent retailers, by their description and character, will desire a degree of autonomy 

in making decisions that apply to the operation of their own stores  – the very reason they 

are  independent  rather  than  fully  integrated.    However,  for  certain  aspects,  independent 

retailers may like to give up some element of their freedom as they recognise that centrally-

taken  decisions  can  benefit  them  and  their  customers.    For  instance,  centrally-taken 

decisions  might  enhance  the  consistency  of  the  retail  offer,  provide  greater  assurance  on 

service  reliability  to  consumers,  and  thereby  increase  consumer  satisfaction  with  the 

shopping  experience.      Nevertheless,  even  if  the  retail  members  might  desire  such 

centralised  decision-making,  competition  law  and  policy  rules  can  limit  the  nature  and 

extent of any centrally administered control on individual members. 

Legal treatment of vertical agreements for independent retailer groups 

3.37 

In some respects, competition law can be sufficiently flexible and amenable that it does not 

hinder independent retailer groups to any significant extent, such as over format design and 

visual  merchandising.    However,  in  regard  to  other  aspects,  competition  law  does  restrict 

the extent to which a group can make and implement centrally-determined decisions.  This 

43 

 
 
 
 
 
Final Report 

Levelling the Playing Field 2.0 

is  most  apparent  with  pricing  and  joint  commercialisation.    For  instance,  a  group’s  central 

office (i.e. central administrative function) or wholesale arm cannot dictate the retail price at 

which goods must be sold, or the minimum price that they can be sold for.  Such resale price 

maintenance arrangements are contractually unenforceable under present EU competition 

law and are viewed as illegal vertical price fixing (and, if used, could result in a substantial 

fine  in  most  EU  member  states).    Even  imposing  “retail  price  ceilings”  on  members,  i.e. 

dictating the maximum resale price, may not be deemed to be an acceptable practice if the 

group possesses a high market share (specifically, 30% or more), even when the intention is 

to ensure that members keep prices low to raise sales levels and benefit final consumers in 

the process. However, national authorities may have the good sense to recognise this can be 

pro-competitive  in  restricting  high  prices  and  curbing  individual  retailers  exploiting  local 

market power. 

3.38  The same  reasoning  applies  to necessary information exchanges  between the  members of 

the group and the group’s central office or among the members for the benefit of the whole 

group.    These  can  aid  efficient  and  work  to  the  advantage  of  consumers  by  helping  to 

identify and use best practices on data sharing, such as for coordinating marketing activities 

or  supporting  group  members  in  all  respective  manners  to  help  them  reduce  bureaucracy 

and administrative costs.  

3.39  These  restrictions  on  a  group’s  pricing  control,  even  when  this  is  clearly  intended  to  aid 

competitive positioning and benefit consumers (e.g. in respect of preventing high prices and 

promoting  brand  consistency),  are  in  stark  contrast  with  the  extent  of  allowable  vertical 

control and market behaviour exercised by integrated chains.  Here competition law freely 

allows integrated chains to centrally determine and administer all prices in all stores within 

the  chain  regardless  of  whether  this  is  to  the  benefit  of  consumers  (again  in  respect  of 

preventing high prices and promoting brand consistency) or to the detriment of consumers 

(such as raising prices to consumers in those areas where the chain’s outlets face little local 

competition).    This  applies  so  long  as  pricing  is  neither  deliberately  predatory  nor 

exceptionally exploitative in nature. 

3.40  A  similar  concern  relates  to  the  treatment  of  purchasing  obligations.    An  integrated  chain 

can centrally determine and administer all stocking requirements for all stores in the chain, 

i.e. dictating product availability and amount supplied at each individual store.  In contrast, a 

central office at the wholesale level for a group of independent retailers is restricted in the 

44 

 
 
 
 
 
Final Report 

Levelling the Playing Field 2.0 

range  and extent  of purchasing obligations that can be  applied to retail members and has 

little  or  no  control  over  which  products  and  in  what  amounts  the  individual  retailer 

ultimately  chooses  to  stock  from  the  range  on  offer.    Typically,  the  allowable  maximum 

limits for purchasing obligations extend to 80% of goods purchased and for a duration limit 

of  up  to  5  years.    This  creates  two  obvious  problems.  First,  free-riding  activity  cannot  be 

controlled  so  effectively  (e.g.  retailers  refusing  to  stock  special  promotional  products  or 

obtaining  delisted  products  from  other  wholesale  operations,  thereby  undermining  the 

bargaining  position  of  the  group  as  a  whole,  or  retailers  stock  products  without  quality 

control  or  questionable  quality  and  thus  endangering  the  group’s  reputation).    Second, 

independent retailer groups are deliberately established as an ongoing relationship for the 

benefit  of  members  and  consumers  (not  least  in  respect  of  ensuring  consistency  of  brand 

image and member participation), so a duration limit undermines retailers’ commitments to 

a  particular  group  and  complicates  administration  and  contracting  arrangements  (thereby 

raising costs and serving as a business distraction).  

3.41  On  both  accounts,  the  limitations  on  vertical  control  (i.e.  on  retail  pricing  and  purchasing 

obligations)  restrict  the  efficiency  at  which  independent  retailer  groups  can  operate, 

weakening the ability of independent retailers to act as a critical competitive force and as a 

counterbalance  to  the  market  power  of  integrated  chains.    As  a  result,  these  limitations 

work  against  the  interests  of  consumers  in  ensuring  low  prices,  wide  choice  and  service 

variety. 

3.42  A compounding effect can arise from the way that competition policy rules or lack of clear 

policy  guidance  can  mean  that  independent  retailer  groups  may  be  prevented  or  unclear 

about whether different parties within the group can share particular forms of information, 

notably in respect of sales, pricing and marketing.  Such information exchange could be vital, 

such  as  the  central  office  needing  to  use  independent  retailer  sales  to  improve  its  own 

operations as well the services it provides to retailer members.   

3.43  The  need  for  efficient  and  effect  information  exchanges  becomes  especially  apparent  in 

coordinating multichannel retailing.  Here there is a need to exchange sales information to 

across  the  group  along  with  information  on  pricing  and  adherence  to  joint  marketing  and 

prescribed product ranges to facilitate joint commercialisation. This information exchange is 

crucial for the efficiency of logistics, stock replenishment and supply operations along with 

assuring local product availability for the benefit of consumers.  This information exchange is 

45 

 
 
 
 
 
Final Report 

Levelling the Playing Field 2.0 

also  vital  in  enabling  the  group  to  respond  quickly  to  changing  market  circumstances  and 

competitive moves by rival retail organisations to initiate price changes and other marketing 

responses to ensure competitiveness.   

Legal treatment of mixed arrangement structures 

3.44  However, it is not just simply in relation to vertical agreement regulations that independent 

retailer  groups  are  hampered  and  effectively  discriminated  against  compared  to  the 

favourable legal treatment offered to integrated chains.  The nature of independent retailer 

groups  co-ordinated  by  a  central  office  or  wholesale  operation  can  entail  that  within  the 

group relations can have both a vertical element (i.e. central office to retailer) as well as a 

horizontal element (i.e. retailer to retailer in respect of shared benefits).  Unfortunately, this 

has  given  rise  to  some  competition  authorities  viewing  such  arrangements  as  first  and 

foremost  as  being  horizontal  (i.e.  co-operative)  in  nature  but  controlled  by  a  vertical 

relationship (with the central office as the essential facilitator and co-ordinator).  Given the 

much  tighter  rules  and  regulations  that  generally  apply  to  horizontal  co-operative 

agreements  between  competitors  with  concerns  over  cartelisation  and  competition 

avoidance,  this  has  meant  that  some  independent  retailer  groups  have  been  subject  to 

considerably more stringent  limits on their size  (in respect of allowable  market  share)  and 

activities (in respect of operational control) than they would be if treated as simple vertical 

agreements.   

3.45  Thus,  for  instance,  a  group  of  independent  retailers  that  have  members  operating  in  the 

same  geographical  market  may  be  allowed  to  operate  relatively  unimpeded  only  if  such 

members’  (collective)  market  share  is  no  greater  than  15%  (as  a  horizontal  agreement 

between competitors),  even though its very nature is about  promoting efficiency amongst 

independent  retailers  to  allow  them  to  be  more  effective  competitors  –  both  against 

integrated  chains  and  amongst  themselves.    Yet  this  market  share  threshold  may  be 

perceived as a bar to the level of efficiency that the group can attain  – for example in the 

extent  to  which  it  can  negotiate  discounts  from  suppliers  that  can  then  be  passed  on  to 

consumers  in  the  form  of  lower  retail  prices.    In  contrast,  integrated  chains  may  face  no 

restriction in how much they are allowed to grow, at least through organic growth.  Only in 

respect  of  mergers  and  acquisitions  might  restrictions  be  imposed,  and  even  here  the 

allowable threshold before being prohibited might be as high as a 40% share (i.e. the level at 

which EU case law has tended to view a firm as holding a dominant position in a market). 

46 

 
 
 
 
 
Final Report 

Levelling the Playing Field 2.0 

3.46  A  market  share  threshold  set  at  15%  (or  indeed  10%  or  20%  as  may  apply  in  some 

jurisdictions)  is  both  arbitrary  and  considerably  below  the  level  at  which  anti-competitive 

concerns are normally raised in relation to vertical restraints (i.e. generally taken as 30% in 

the  context  of  the  European  Commission’s  guidelines  on  vertical  restraints).    The  market 

context  should  take  precedence.    In  situations  where  integrated  chains  have  significantly 

higher shares than this threshold, then the competitive ability of the group will be stifled by 

this restriction (as it will be at a competitive disadvantage compared to these rival groups in 

respect  of  negotiating  with  suppliers  and  drawing  on  scale  economies).    Even  when  an 

independent  retailer  group  represents  the 

largest  collective  body 

in  the  market, 

consideration should be given to the basis on which the group has developed – primarily as a 

means  to  secure  improved  terms  with  suppliers  and  as  a  means  of  operating  with  a 

consistent  marketing  image.    Such  means  offer  direct  benefits  to  consumers  when  lower 

purchase  costs  are  translated  into  lower  retail  prices  and  when  consistency  in  marketing 

provides greater assurance on service reliability and thereby increases consumer satisfaction 

and overall demand.  

3.47  More fundamentally, a mixed arrangement of vertical and horizontal relationships should be 

seen  and  assessed  exactly  as  that  –  i.e.  a  mixed  arrangement  on  which  the  net  economic 

effect  of  the  combination  should  be  the  prime  consideration  for  assessment.    Specifically, 

horizontal  elements  should  neither  be  viewed  in  isolation  nor  taking  precedence  over 

vertical  elements.    Rather,  they  should  be  viewed  together  as  an  intrinsic  package  in  the 

makeup  of  independent  retailer  groups.    In  this  respect,  it  needs  to  be  understood  that 

specific  vertical  agreements  may  mitigate  any  horizontal  cooperation  concerns,  and  vice 

versa.   

3.48  A  prime  example  is  the  role  of  maximum  resale  prices,  which  prevents  individual  retail 

members from exploiting any local monopoly power they may jointly hold when rivals (e.g. 

integrated chains) are absent from certain locations in which they operate (e.g. remote rural 

locations).  It needs to be borne in mind that these are normally about vertical control (to 

prevent  overpricing  and  thereby  underselling),  and  not  about  horizontal  agreements  with 

the  intention  of  co-ordinating  to  raise  prices  (as  they  might  be  classified  by  some 

competition authorities)  where  two or more members of a group of independent retailers 

are active in the same geographical retail market. 

47 

 
 
 
 
 
Final Report 

Levelling the Playing Field 2.0 

3.49  Equally,  though,  fixed  common  retail  prices  required  for  retail  members  may  have  an 

important role to play in joint commercialisation processes and the development of a brand 

image among retail members.  In particular, this can build trust and assurance in the mind of 

consumers in support of value-for-money propositions, facilitating more informed decisions 

for  consumers  and  generally  encouraging  demand  (and  therefore  offering  significant 

consumer  benefits).  Such  benefits  may  be  recognised  in  relation  to  an  assessment  as  a 

horizontal agreement (when consumer benefits flow from joint commercialisation activity).  

But when assessed as a vertical agreement, this behaviour would be seen as an example of 

fixed resale price maintenance and therefore prohibited under EU regulations, regardless of 

the market share controlled by the parties (even if this were below the normal  de-minimis 

level)  and  regardless  of  whether  this  practice  would  be  indispensable  for  the  purpose  of 

securing joint commercialisation benefits. 

3.50  The point is that labelling or typecasting independent retailer groups as merely instruments 

for  horizontal  agreements  misses  their  real  economic  value  when  they  offer  efficiency 

benefits  in  respect  of  vertical  relations  –  generating  lower  prices  and  better  terms  from 

suppliers that can be passed on to consumers and improving the quality and consistency of 

the retail offer to the benefit of consumers.  Equally, perceiving independent retailer groups 

that may seek to operate common retail prices as merely using vertical agreements for the 

sake  of  eliminating  intra-group  competition  and  dampening  inter-group  competition 

through  fixed  resale  price  maintenance  (which  is  treated  as  a  hardcore  restraint  and 

normally prohibited under EU law), misses the real economic value of such behaviour when 

it  offers  efficiency  benefits  in  respect  of  joint  commercialisation  processes  through 

horizontal agreements.   

The economic and social role performed by independent retailers 

3.51  EU competition policy is in certain aspects proving to be an obstacle more than an assistance 

in promoting effective competition.  Competition law in some instances unduly discriminates 

against such groups compared to the freedom that fully integrated chains enjoy in respect of 

vertical and horizontal control by a central organisation over individual stores in a chain for 

no  reason  beyond  one  organisation  form  is  managed  by  relationships  and  the  other  is 

managed by ownership. 

3.52 

In facing such unduly unfair and discriminatory treatment, it may seem reasonable to ask the 

question  why  should  the  independent  retailers  not  simply  accept  this  legal  position  and 

48 

 
 
 
 
 
Final Report 

Levelling the Playing Field 2.0 

instead  integrate  to  become  fully  integrated  chains  themselves?    The  question,  though, 

misses  the  point  about  the  important  economic  and  social  roles  played  by  independent 

retailers,  in  particular  their  contribution  to  entrepreneurship,  organisational  diversity, 

experimentation and innovation.  In addition, independent retailers have a vital role to play 

in ensuring that consumers continue to be well served and enjoy variety and choice while at 

the same time ensuring that integrated chains are kept keen – particularly as retail markets 

consolidate. 

3.53  First, establishing an independent retail operation is often the way that many entrepreneurs 

begin  in  business.    Particularly  if  they  are  members  of  a  group  of  independent  retailers, 

these entrepreneurs can design and experiment with different retail concepts and different 

product mixes, working with different business models to see which prove successful.  Such 

experimentation can promote new methods of operation and new services to target existing 

consumer  demand  more  effectively,  as  well  as  open  up  the  prospects  for  new,  latent 

demand to be served with the arrival of new services or new product mixes. 

3.54  Second, independent retailers may go where integrated chains avoid, such as serving rural 

and  socially  deprived  urban  areas.    In  such  instances,  independent  retailers  may  be  more 

prepared because of their community conscience to accept the associated low returns and 

greater  business  risks  than  would  integrated  chains.    For  consumers  in  these  areas,  an 

independent retailer may be their only effective source serving their retail needs.  Yet, even 

in  areas  where  choice  exists,  independent  retailers  may  provide  local  consumers  with 

something  different  and  thus  of  value  to the  offering  by  outlets  of  integrated chains.    For 

example, independent retailers typically have greater flexibility to adapt their retail offer to 

cater for specific customer needs in a given community (such as stocking locally produced 

goods, providing credit to regular shoppers, offering additional services like home delivery, 

and adjusting opening hours to suit local needs).35  

3.55  Third, the  presence of a vibrant  independent  retail sector serves  as a competitive force to 

ensure  that  integrated  chains  must  compete  intensely  for  the  custom  of  shoppers, 

encouraging  them  to  innovate  and  generally  improve  their  offer.    This  is  particularly 

important  as  retail  markets  consolidate,  with  integrated  chains  becoming  both  larger  and 

35 Independent retailers may also bring more to a community than a chain outlet in other ways, such 
as through paying local taxes, using local service providers, and sponsoring local clubs and community 
social initiatives.     

49 

 
 
 
 
 
                                                      
Final Report 

Levelling the Playing Field 2.0 

fewer in number  (as mergers and acquisitions continue) and where  otherwise competitive 

intensity might be lessened. 

3.56  With a rich and diverse retail sector, consumers are offered greater choice  and a range  of 

different value-for-money retail service propositions.  Equally, though, suppliers are offered 

a variety of routes to markets, which may take on considerable economic importance when 

it  opens  up  greater  possibilities  for  new  suppliers,  with  perhaps  new  products,  to  emerge 

and compete with existing suppliers.  Accordingly, the substantial presence of independent 

retailers,  and  a  lack  of  dominance  by  any  single  (integrated)  group,  may  hold  the  key  to 

ensuring  that  both  demand  and  supply  opportunities  are  fully  realised  to  the  economic 

good.  

3.57  Thus,  ensuring  the  efficiency,  competitive  resilience  and  ongoing  development  of 

independent  retailers  should  be  seen  as  an  integral  part  of  the  good  functioning  of  retail 

markets and benefitting consumers, and certainly not as some anachronism that has no role 

to play in modern retailing. 

3.58  Building on this section of the report, Appendix D at the end of this report provides a more 

detailed analysis of how existing competition policy in the EU applies to independent retailer 

groups.  The analysis highlights the deficiencies in current competition policy and the clear 

need  for  greater  appreciation  and  understanding  of  the  role,  purpose  and  organisation  of 

such  groups  as  a  pro-competitive  force  rather  than  being  treated  as  simply  a  set  of 

inherently  anti-competitive  horizontal  and  vertical  agreements  and  so  subjected  to 

inappropriate blanket rules which are harmful to competition and serve against the interests 

of consumers.   The  Appendix identifies  the specific policy areas, rules and guidance  which 

policymakers urgently need to address. 

50 

 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
Final Report 

Levelling the Playing Field 2.0 

4. CHALLENGES AND POLICY CONCERNS FOR 
INDEPENDENT RETAILER GROUPS 

Evidence  gathered  from  a  detailed  questionnaire  survey  of  independent  retailer  groups 
shows how much they vary in terms of their organisational and ownership forms, displaying 
a  rich  variety  of  retail  models  applied  to  different  retail  markets  in  different  EU  member 
states.    While  differences  exist,  the  survey  shows  the  extent  of  their  common  features  as 
well.  The purpose  of this section is  draw on this survey evidence to consider the nature of 
independent  retailer  groups,  looking  at  their  presence  in  the  European  context,  how  the 
groups  are  organised  and  structured,  their  economic  role,  and  the  competitive  challenges 
and  legal  obstacles  that  they  face.    In  particular,  it  is  evident  that  independent  retailer 
groups  have  multiple  roles  to  offer  for  the  benefit  of  consumers:  they  can  be  forces  that 
support  and  promote  efficiency,  innovation,  competition  and  diversity.    However,  it  is  also 
clear that certain aspects of current competition policy and law are preventing groups from 
fully developing these roles and thus restricting the benefits that they can offer consumers, 
especially  in  view  of  the  increasing  importance  of  e-commerce  and  rapid  technological 
developments taking place in retail markets that are reshaping competition in the sector. 

4.A  Independent retailer groups in Europe 

4.1  A  range  of  industry  studies  have  examined  the  nature,  structure  and  changes  that  have 

taken place in retailing over recent years, but most attention focuses on the development of 

integrated chains, especially their international spread and increasing market domination in 

many  sectors.36    Researchers  have  given  much  less  attention  to  the  role  of  independent 

retailer  groups  and  their  impact  on,  and  equally  how  they  have  been  impacted  by, 

developments  in  retailing.    This  is  most  apparent  regarding  European  developments  in 

36 For an historical perspective, see Paul Ellickson, “The Evolution of the Supermarket Industry: From 
A&P to Wal-Mart” in Emek Basker (ed.) the Handbook on the Economics of Retailing and Distribution, 
Chapter 15, pp. 368-391, 2016; Andrew Seth and Geoffrey Randall, The Grocers: The Rise and Rise of 
Supermarket Chains (Kogan Page), Third Edition, 2011.  On the impact of online retailing on physical 
store  retailing,  see  Rajiv  Lal,   Jose  Alvarez,  and  Dan  Greenberg,  Retail  Revolution:  Will  Your  Brick  & 
Mortar  Store  Survive?  (Rajiv  Lal),  2014.  On  the  rise  of  discount  retailers,  see  Rune Jacobsen, 
Gavin Parker,  Thomas Jensen,  Jeroen Magnus,  Holger Gottstein,  Markus Hepp,  and  Bill Urda,  “How 
Discounters  Are  Remaking  the  Grocery  Industry”  (Boston  Consulting  Group),  April  2017.    On 
competition policy treatment, see Pierre Kobel,  Pranvera Këllezi and Bruce Kilpatrick (eds.), Antitrust 
in  the  Groceries  Sector  &  Liability  Issues  in  Relation  to  Corporate  Social  Responsibility  (LIDC 
Contributions on Antitrust Law, Intellectual Property and Unfair Competition), 2016. 

51 

 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                      
Final Report 

Levelling the Playing Field 2.0 

general,  beyond  national  level  studies.37    The  result  is  a  lack  of  empirically  gathered 

information  and  analysis  on  the  role  of  independent  retailers  groups,  the  different  forms 

that they take, the nature of their arrangements, and the impact of competition policy and 

legal restrictions facing these groups across Europe as a whole.   

4.2 

To provide informed insights on the actual nature and role of independent retailer groups, 

while building on the retail organisation classifications and conceptual perspectives provided 

in the previous section, this section sets out the information gathered through a survey of a 

wide  array  of  such  groups,  operating  in  different markets, and  in  different  countries.    The 

source of the information is from a questionnaire study of members of Independent Retail 

Europe  (IRE), as the  pan-European association that acts  as an umbrella association for the 

main independent retailer groups in the food and non-food sectors.  The questionnaire and 

full details of the analysis of responses are respectively contained in Appendices A and B at 

the end of this report.  This section of the report draws on the findings of the questionnaire 

study,  along  with  interviews  conducted  with  individual  groups,  to  provide  insights  on  the 

organisational  structure  and  composition  of  groups,  behaviour  and  practices  used  by  the 

groups, and the key issues and challenges facing groups. 

4.B  Questionnaire study information 

4.3 

The questionnaire study serves as the key means in gathering primary-sourced data from a 

wide  selection  of  retailer  groups,  both  large  and  small.    The  resulting  information  is 

important  to the overall economic study because it provides direct evidence from a broad 

spectrum  of  different  independent  retailer  groups  for  their  views  and  information  on  the 

central  aspects  of  developments  in  retail  markets,  the  competitive  context  in  which  their 

organisations  operate,  and  the  legal  and  policy  challenges  that  their  groups  and  members 

face  in  striving  to  be  competitive  and  efficient.    In  total,  thirty-six  organisations  agreed  to 

participate in the survey and duly provided completed responses to the questionnaire.   

4.4 

The questionnaire  employed for the study has forty questions divided into four parts with 

the intention to build up a fully representative picture of how  independent retailer groups 

37 For example, see EY, The economic impact of modern retail on choice and innovation in the EU food 
sector (European Commission), 2014, which provides a very detailed analysis of the EU grocery sector 
but does not assess or comment on the role and contribution of independent retailer groups. 

52 

 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                      
Final Report 

Levelling the Playing Field 2.0 

function, the market circumstances they face, how they have been performing, the kinds of 

contractual agreements  and arrangements they employ or would like  to employ, and how 

regulations, public policy and legal restrictions affect their groups and membership in terms 

of impacting efficiency and competitiveness and what the groups would like and need to see 

changed.  (See Appendix A for the full questionnaire).   

4.5  With thirty-six respondent organisations participating in the survey and potentially providing 

information  on  all  forty  questions  then  there  are  potentially  1,440  responses  to  analyse 

across these different subjects and issues. 

4.6 

The  first  part  of  the  questionnaire  covers  background  information  about  the  respondent’s 

organisation  and  relationship  with  retail  members,  to  help  understand  the  diversity  of 

different groups in respect of their history, purpose, primary roles, their direct or indirect of 

representation  of  independent  retailers,  how  their  organisation  is  governed,  owned  and 

managed, and how the group and its relationship with retail members is distinguished from 

an integrated retailer organisation or franchising organisation. 

4.7 

The second part of the questionnaire covers details about independent retailer membership 

and  performance,  including  how  retailer  members  are  represented  and  their  combined 

turnover,  the process  by which retailers become members and the scale and frequency of 

gaining  or  losing  members,  the  proportion  of  retail  members  operating  single  outlets,  the 

types of goods sold, how internet sales are managed, the performance over the last decade 

on combined retailer sales turnover, profit and market share and key drivers of change, and 

how  recent  business  developments  and  regulatory/legal  requirements  could  affect  the 

ability to compete on effective terms. 

4.8 

The  third  part  of  the  questionnaire  asks  respondents  about  contractual  agreements  and 

arrangements  used  by  groups,  including  obligations  placed  on  independent  retailer 

members, the services and terms of trade that groups are unable to provide because of the 

organisation’s structure and legal impediments, the additional costs and loss of benefits for 

members  if  they  were  not  part  of  the  group,  and  the  advantages  that  other  retail 

organisational forms have other independent retailer groups. 

4.9 

The  fourth  and  final  part  of  the  questionnaire  concerns  policy,  regulation  and  legal 

developments and is split into two sections, with the first about national policy issue and the 

second about EU-level policy matters, covering the ways in which groups and their members 

53 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Final Report 

Levelling the Playing Field 2.0 

are  impacted  by  current  policy  and  what  they  would  like  to  see  changed  to  improve 

efficiency and competitiveness for their groups as well provide benefits to their membership 

and end-consumers. 

4.10  Appendix B attached to this report provides a full and comprehensive review and analysis of 

the  responses  to  the  questionnaire  study.    The  questions  focus  on  gathering  qualitative 

information but there are some questions that provide quantitative information.  For those 

questions  relating  to  quantitative  information,  mostly  about  the  background  to  the 

organisations, then this information has been used to draw comparisons and highlight  the 

spectrum and broad cross-section of the different organisations that have participated in the 

questionnaire survey.  The responses to the questions providing qualitative information are 

summarised,  categorised  and  tabulated  to  provide  succinct  summaries.    In  reporting  the 

findings,  tables  are  used  to  summarise  the  information  in  a  condensed  form  for  each 

element  of  the  questionnaire,  along  with  providing  brief  commentaries  on  each 

accompanying table.   

4.11  The sample of firms surveyed was a suitably broad, with some groups established for more 

than a hundred years and others more recently formed.  There was also a mix of small and 

large organisations in terms of membership numbers and sales turnover.  In addition, there 

was a mix of types of organisation and with different core business purposes relating to their 

primary  functions  and  roles  and  different  ownership,  decision-making  and  governance 

structures.    There  was  also  a  broad  span  of  food  and  non-food  retail  and  related  sectors 

covered. 

4.12  This  section  of  the  report  provides  an  overview  of  the  findings  from  the  survey  on  the 

nature, structure, ownership and organisational relationships of the groups, along with their 

market position, competitiveness, and the key issues they face in respect of national and EU 

policy. 

4.C  Organizational structure and composition of groups 

4.13  The structure, functioning and organisation of the groups surveyed varied according to their 

history, market and legal context, and purpose.   

4.14 

In  terms  of  ownership,  most  groups  are  owned  by  their  members  or  by  associates.    For 

example,  independent  retailer  members  might  own  their  central  organisation  (i.e.  the 

54 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Final Report 

Levelling the Playing Field 2.0 

central office  function) or at  least act  as  direct majority  shareholders  and members of the 

organisation.  At a different vertical level, though, it could be wholesale cooperatives owning 

their  central  organisation.    Additionally,  the  groups  surveyed  covered  other  ownership 

arrangements  including  stock  corporations,  trade  associations  with  no  commercial  links 

between members, and vertical chain operating systems.  In general, most groups displayed 

elements of a mixed structure of horizontal and vertical arrangements and agreements. 

4.15  For most cases, the central organisation is managed by an executive board or management 

aided by an advisory council.  Some groups have a permanent secretary, while others have 

decisions taken in working groups.  Most groups have permanent staff or management staff 

dealing  with  the  day-to-day  operations  of  the  organisation,  generally  indicative  of  the 

independent retailer group taking on more roles than joint purchasing. For example, these 

roles  may  cover  joint  marketing  activities,  management  of  logistics  and  providing  other 

services  to  members,  including  brand  representation  of  retail  outlets  (such  as  sharing  a 

common fascia as a standard trading name). 

4.D  Contractual agreements and arrangements used by groups 

4.16  The  questionnaire  survey  reveals  that  coordination  between  the  groups  and  individual 

retailer  members  represented  takes  place  in  various  ways  besides  explicit  contractual 

agreements, as explained in the previous section. These include voluntary service offers and 

informal  agreements  based  on  trust.    The  service  offers  extend  beyond  trading  goods  to 

include  the  transfer  of  know-how,  information  services,  lobbying,  training  and  other 

business support.  

4.17  For  groups  that  use  contractual  arrangements  between  themselves  and  their  independent 

retailer  members,  the  nature  and  content  of  the  contracts  vary,  ranging  from  supply  and 

price negotiation agreements to various branding, marketing and store layout agreements.  

Arrangements  also  cover  joint  purchasing  requirements  (for  efficiencies),  retaining  control 

rights  over  store  location  (to  manage  future  store  network  planning),  and  brand  licensing 

agreements (for a common image and protecting intellectual property).  

4.18  Groups use price recommendations, but these can entail suggested schedules and menus of 

price  points  rather  than  a  single  specific  suggested  price  for  a  specific  product.    Nearly  all 

price recommendations relate to suggested prices or maximum resale prices.  Some groups 

limit  price  agreements  or  recommendations  only  to  certain  brands  (e.g.  private  label  or 

55 

 
 
 
 
 
Final Report 

Levelling the Playing Field 2.0 

exclusively supplied branded goods) or promotion goods (where some control is needed to 

ensure  a  consistent  retail  image  across  the  group  and  ensure  that  consumers  obtain  the 

advantages  of  low  prices  for  key  products),  or  only  applied  to  selected  retailers  (for  the 

purpose of common retail branding).  However, groups were frustrated that they could not 

require uniform retail prices across the store network in the form of fixed prices, particularly 

for price promoted goods where the groups felt that the assurance of consistency and clarity 

of  the  price  offer  across  stores  would  help  with  advertising  and  benefit  consumers.  

Similarly,  there  was  frustration  that  joint  advertising  could  not  be  required  to  support 

common marketing and price positioning for a consistent retail brand image beyond specific 

short-term promotions. 

4.19  The  majority  of  contracts  appear  to  be  mainly  vertical  in  nature,  between  a  central  office 

function and independent retailer members, and not between individual retailer members 

(as a horizontal arrangement).  However, retailer cooperatives through their nature tend to 

be member controlled, so the horizontal nature of agreements takes on greater significance 

than  in  wholesaler-led  vertical  chains,  where  vertical  agreements  are  central  to  the  group 

arrangements.   

4.20  For most groups surveyed, it is not a condition of membership that all independent retailers 

have to adhere to all agreements.  In practice, agreements appear to be a mix of voluntary 

agreements and binding contracts.  Among the mandatory agreements, the most common 

appear  to  relate  to  promotions  and  advertising,  followed  by  store  operations  (including 

store  layout,  staff  training,  and  branding),  and  then  exclusive  purchasing  and  minimum 

purchasing  (non-compete)  obligations,  along  with  instances  of  exclusive  and  selective 

distribution. 

4.21  The purpose of the agreements mostly relate to securing cost savings that help support the 

competitiveness  of  the  business.  The  cost  savings  result  from  economics  of  scale  in 

purchasing, logistics and marketing, which are then passed on to the consumer in the form 

of lower prices and a larger choice of products.  The agreements, and the cost savings they 

create,  are  considered  to  be  necessary  for  independent  retailers  to  compete  against  the 

often much larger integrated chains and other organisational forms they face in their retail 

sectors, including franchise operations and consumer cooperatives.  The agreements allow 

independent retailers to survive and prosper, thereby contributing to sustaining competition 

in  markets  and  offering  retail  choice  to  consumers.    In  addition  to  cost  savings,  other 

56 

 
 
 
 
 
Final Report 

Levelling the Playing Field 2.0 

benefits  from  the  agreements  achieving  a  well-recognised  retail  brand  and  unified  store 

image  through  joint  marketing  and  branding  requirements  and  maintaining  a  strong  price 

image  when  retailers  adopt  common  pricing  and  dissuaded  or  prevented  from  setting 

unduly high prices. 

4.22  Obligations to purchase jointly provide a means to ensure that the groups receive the lowest 

prices from suppliers, so viewed as indispensable to ensure efficiency and competitiveness 

whereby independent retailers can pool their resources and bargaining power in order to be 

able  to  compete  effectively  against  integrated  chains.    Similarly,  agreements  over  store 

fascia and retail branding under a common logo were deemed necessary for the existence of 

same-branded retail operations and maintaining a consistent and clear retail image for the 

benefit of consumers. 

4.23  Without  the  agreements,  groups  foresaw  that  their  retail  members  would  suffer  from 

increased  costs  and  higher  purchase  prices.    The  estimates  of  these  higher  costs  broadly 

ranged  from  5%  to  20%  extra  depending  on  the  organisation,  relating  primarily  to  higher 

purchase  prices,  fixed  costs  of  negotiation,  lower  economies  of  scale,  inefficient  logistics, 

additional  warehousing  costs,  reduced  product  range,  higher  marketing  costs,  additional 

administration costs, loss of central invoicing, and loss of efficiency in developing an online 

presence. 

4.24 

In the absence of an independent  retailer group to provide these  benefits to retailers, the 

expected impact of consumers would be reduced choice of products and higher prices, along 

with  a  long-term  decline  in  the  number  of  independent  retailers,  all  to  the  detriment  of 

consumers.  Any exit of retail outlets would be likely to harm particular communities badly, 

especially in rural areas where retail choice is already limited.  

4.E  Key challenges facing groups 

4.25 

Independent  retailer  groups  compete  on  service,  product  choice  and  prices.    Competitors 

are other retailers in general, but most significantly integrated retailers, whether joint stock 

companies or consumer  cooperatives, or franchise  systems.    Survey respondents  indicated 

that  their  independent  retailer  members  are  at  a  competitive  disadvantage  because  of 

perceived  restrictions  on  contractual  arrangements  within  the  groups  that  inhibit  their 

ability  to  compete  effectively  in  terms  of  the  economies  of  scale,  coordination  and 

marketing consistency enjoyed by other retail organisations.   

57 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Final Report 

Levelling the Playing Field 2.0 

4.26  The respondents report a mixed performance over the last decade with some growing, some 

declining,  some  fluctuating,  and  yet  others  stable.    However,  the  perception  is  that  their 

competitive disadvantage in the new retail environment is restricting their performance and 

ability to respond rapidly in changing competitive situations.  In particular, the groups feel 

that  they  have  less  control  than  integrated  groups  on  product  assortment,  pricing  and 

advertising, all of which are vital in highly competitive environments. In addition, they feel 

they suffer cost inefficiency compared to integrated chains, especially in purchasing but also 

in higher personnel costs with less ability to balance staff requirements.  

4.27  Concern about competitive disadvantage is felt most strongly in relation to online retailing, 

where  independent  retailer  groups  consider  that  legal  impediments  to  using  consistent 

pricing and marketing and their  inability to coordinate  fully  internet  sales  through a  single 

centralised  online  operation  is  a  serious  competitive  impediment.  Instead,  independent 

retailer  groups  are  often  using  less  efficient  decentralised  internet  sales  arrangements, 

which suffer from a lack of coordination, a lack of consistency in branding, and inefficiency in 

terms of supply arrangements for consumers.  In contrast, without the same contractual and 

legal impediments,  integrated retailers have  been  able to adopt  more efficient centralised 

online  retailing  and  greater  coordination  for  developing  strong  multichannel  retail 

operations. 

4.F  National and EU policy issues 

4.28  Respondents identified several practices which are currently prohibited but which should, in 

their view, be allowed to enhance their competitiveness.  These prohibited practices along 

with other restrictions were attributed to national policy and EU policy.  

4.29 

In  regard  to  national  policy,  the  key  impediments  are  viewed  as  undue  bureaucracy  (e.g. 

labour laws, price controls, waste controls, and recycling requirements), planning policy (for 

new stores or extensions), restrictions on opening hours (which limited trade),  and energy 

policy  (including  renewable  energy  levies  driving  up  retailer  costs  and  waste  disposal 

regulations  creating  unfair  advantages  to  online  retailers  who  avoid  such  requirements).  

The  main  competition  policy  restrictions  concern  prohibiting  or  limiting  common  prices, 

resale price maintenance, joint marketing, joint supply obligations, selective distribution and 

exclusive distribution. 

58 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Final Report 

Levelling the Playing Field 2.0 

4.30  National  decisions  relevant  to  retailing  include  the  restrictive  policy  treatment  towards 

horizontal and vertical restraints, market definition, cooperatives, and planning.  

4.31  At  the  EU  level,  policy  concerns  relate  to  vertical  restraints  policy,  EU  policy  dictating 

national  policy,  bureaucracy  (excessive  regulations  and  legal  requirements),  the  internal 

market  (labelling  requirement  differences  still  persisting  across  the  EU  and  inability  to 

promote nationality), and tax policy (allowing the migration of companies to tax havens and 

using transfer pricing to move profits out of the EU).  

4.32  The  most  desired  EU  policy  changes  are  to  allow  common  pricing  and  resale  price 

maintenance  for promotion goods (and so allow  them to compete on the same  footing as 

integrated  chains),  have  equal  treatment  in  law  for  independent  retailer  groups  and 

integrated  chains,  harmonise  taxes  across  the  EU,  support  cross-border  trade,  avoid 

regulating distribution, and to uphold contract freedom.  

4.33  The  respondents’  views  on  what  constitutes  the  necessary  minimum  (i.e.  least  restrictive) 

arrangements to ensure that independent retailer groups are treated fairly and equitably in 

EU law to support their competitiveness are to allow common prices and maximum resale 

price maintenance, curtail bureaucracy, allow exclusive purchasing obligations and  support 

equality of treatment for their organisations compared to other retail forms. 

4.34  Respondents are concerned about possible future challenges in respect of the groups using 

exclusive  purchasing,  maximum  resale  price  maintenance,  price  standardisation,  joint 

marketing, and sourcing cooperation.  

4.35  Looking forwards in time, respondents see a particular need for EU policy to (i) address the 

unequal  treatment  of  physical  and  online  retailers,  (ii)  recognise  the  growing  threat  from 

large-scale  online  food  retailers  undermining  viability  of  rural  retailers  and  reducing  the 

efficiency  of  urban  retailers,  (iii)  tackle  food  chain  policy  and  the  crisis  in  farming  with 

support for the Supply Chain Initiative,38 (iv) deal with the legal uncertainty over maximum 

retail  prices,  (v)  permit  consistent  pricing  and  promotions  across  channels,  (vi)  ensure 

appropriate  regulation  of  payment  terms,  (vi)  ensure  that  market  definition  and  share 

38  The  Supply  Chain  Initiative  (SCI)  is  a  joint  initiative  launched  by  several EU  level  associations  to 
promote  fair  business  practices  in  the  food  supply  chain  as  a  basis  for  commercial  dealings  and 
intended to benefit all players in the food supply chain. See http://www.supplychaininitiative.eu/.  

59 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                      
Final Report 

Levelling the Playing Field 2.0 

thresholds are not arbitrary but relevant to the market context, and (vii) consider the need 

for a law against unfair trading practices.  

4.36  More generally, respondents take the view that present regulations and policy guidance do 

not give sufficient weight to the economic reality facing independent retailers, appearing to 

hamper  rather  than  assist  their  ability  to  compete  on  effective  terms  with  integrated 

retailers.  Independent retailers and their groups appear to be discriminated against because 

of their organisational and ownership form, and not because of their competitive behaviour 

and their impact on the markets that they serve. 

4.37  As  a  consequence  of  present  regulations,  restrictions  and  prohibitions,  groups  note  that 

there  are  a  range  of  services  that  they  are  unable  to  offer  their  members  and  so 

detrimentally affect  their members  (and  consumers as  well)  in  particular  ways.    Three  are 

most  commonly  cited.  First,  there  is a need  to allow  independent retailer groups to offer 

common prices to consumers (which otherwise may harm the consistency of the retail offer 

and make  it more  difficult for independent retailers to compete with integrated chains,  to 

the detriment of consumers).  Second, there is a need to allow for purchase obligations (and 

so  be  able  to  negotiate  the  best  possible  terms  with  suppliers  for  the  benefit  of  retail 

members and consumers).  Third, there is a need to allow retailer groups to strengthen joint 

online  presence  either  by  group  members  conducting  sales  directly  and  jointly  or  via  an 

online platform set by the central office with fulfilment handled by group members. 

4.G  Costs and benefits of retailer independence 

4.38  Given  the  challenging  market  and  legal  and  regulatory  restrictions  facing  independent 

retailers  groups,  favouring  integrated  retailers  and  business  format  franchising,  it  is 

reasonable to ask why independent retailer members wish to remain as independents.  The 

most 

frequently 

listed 

reasons  by 

respondents  are 

independence, 

freedom, 

entrepreneurship  drive,  individuality,  autonomy  and  supporting  tradition.  In  essence, 

independence is seen as a value in itself.  Reasons relating to tradition as well as cultural and 

community drivers are also seen as important. 

4.39  By  contrast,  respondents  view  the  advantages  of  other  retail  forms,  notably  integrated 

retailers,  through  the  freedom  and  absence  of  legal  restrictions  they  enjoy  in  respect  of 

being  able  more  easily  and  freely  to  control  promotions,  brand  image,  pricing,  internal 

integration, product quality, financing, and supply efficiencies. 

60 

 
 
 
 
 
   
Final Report 

Levelling the Playing Field 2.0 

4.40  Despite the advantages listed above, most independent retailer groups indicate the greatest 

problem they face is not in terms of single-owned integrated chains being inherently more 

efficient  (as  they  could  achieve  the  same  benefits  if  permitted  the  same  legal  freedom), 

rather  it  is  restrictions  and  regulations  that  hamper  their  own  efficiency  and  competitive 

ability.    If  permitted  greater  freedom  and  flexibility  in  the  services  and  agreements  they 

could  operate  then  respondents  feel  that  they  would  be  more  efficient  operators  and  be 

better  able  to  compete  with  and  challenge  the  positions  of  integrated  retailers  and  other 

retail forms, and so serve consumers better through improved service quality, greater choice 

and lower prices. 

4.41 

In the absence of a policy change, respondents are concerned about the ability to continue 

to compete so effectively, especially as retailing shifts towards online buying and the greater 

use  and  integration  of  technology  in  retailing  operations  and  its  influence  over  consumer 

purchasing and spending decisions. 

61 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Final Report 

Levelling the Playing Field 2.0 

5. CONCLUSIONS AND POLICY RECOMMENDATIONS 

This section draws conclusions from the study and makes policy recommendations, stressing 
the  need  for  a  level  playing  field  for  different  retail  business  forms  to  support  effective 
competition  and  efficiency  in  the  new  retail  era.    This  will  help  ensure  that  independent 
retailer  groups  receive  a  more  appropriate  legal  treatment  compared  to  the  current 
treatment,  which  is  impeding  their  efficiency  and  competitiveness,  especially  in  respect  of 
online retailing.  The section outlines specific policy recommendations, taking account of the 
rapid developments happening in retailing and the need to maintain and promote effective 
competition  through  policy  that  supports rather than  inhibits  the  efficiency  of  independent 
retailer groups. 

5.A  Need for a level playing field 

5.1  Retailing in the European Union is currently going through significant changes driven by new 

technology  and  changing  shopping  patterns.      These  changes  are  happening  on  a  global 

scale, so not limited to the  EU,  in what is termed the  New  Retail era.  This new  era offers 

consumers  the  promise  of  omnichannel  retailing  with  a  seamless  shopping  experience 

whether  shopping  online  from  a  desktop  or  mobile  device,  by  telephone,  or  in  a  physical 

(bricks  and  mortar)  store.    These  developments  are  driven  by  new  technology  pushing 

forwards  online  retailing,  multichannel  retailing,  increased  use  of  Big  Data,  and  the 

emergence  of  artificial  intelligence  and  machine  learning  in  selling  services  and  providing 

customer information.   

5.2 

Competing  in  this  new  retail  era  requires  making  substantial  investments  in  these 

technological  developments  and  organising  retail  operations  so  they  provide  a  seamless 

shopping  experience  for  consumers.    There  is  the  opportunity  for  all  different  types  and 

forms  of  retail  organisations  to  participate  in  this  retailing  revolution.    However,  existing 

competition  policy  rules  and  guidance  are  deterring  independent  retailer  groups  from 

making the necessary investments to extend their retail operations particularly in respect of 

developing online and mobile device retailing.   

5.3 

In particular, independent retailer groups face considerable legal uncertainty in the extent to 

which  they  can  undertake  practices  through  close  collaboration,  communication,  joint 

commercialisation  and  control  across  their  store  networks  linking  in  with  online  retail 

operations  to  provide  the  necessary  seamless  shopping  experience  for  the  benefit  of 

62 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Final Report 

Levelling the Playing Field 2.0 

consumers.  Integrated retailers do not face these legal issues because their store network is 

under single ownership rather than retail member owned.  

5.4  At  the  heart  of  the  problem  is  the  failure  of  EC  competition  policy  rules  and  guidance  to 

recognise  that 

independent  retailer  groups  are  unified/cohesive  systems  tied  by 

relationships instead of common ownership and are not merely as “associations” operating 

as  some  nexus  of  restrictive  agreements  that  are  inherently  anti-competitive  until  can  be 

proven otherwise.   

5.5 

Specifically, EC competition policy rules and guidance fail to distinguish adequately between 

intra-organisational competition and inter-organisational competition.  Consequently, there 

is a failure to give due recognition to the intrinsic nature of “co-opetition” in the former (i.e. 

relationships that involve a combination of cooperation and competition but where there is 

a single overarching organisational purpose and direction), while seeing the difference with 

intrinsic  direct  competition  in  the  latter  when  different  organisations  having  opposing 

purposes  and  conflicting  intents.    Ultimately,  the  competitiveness  of  markets  depends  on 

inter-organisational  competition  but  to  achieve  this  then  there  needs  to  be  acceptance 

about  the  benefits  of  coordination  and  unity  within  unified/cohesive  systems  to  help 

advance competitiveness and so stimulate greater competition between rival organisations. 

5.6 

In  other  words,  a  competition  policy  that  primarily  focuses  on  protecting  competition 

between members of independent retailer groups (where active in the same relevant retail 

market)  risks  precluding  such  groups  from  business  practices  necessary  to  remain 

competitive in the new retail era when the greater issue is inter-group competition in retail 

markets.    

5.7 

If  policymakers  and  regulators  wish  to  see  effective  competition  prevail  in  retail  markets 

then  they  need  to  understand  better  how  different  types  of  retail organisations  work  and 

operate so policy can be designed and implemented to ensure that different business forms 

are not subject to discriminatory and unfair policy treatment.   

5.8 

Fair  competition  requires  a  level  playing  field.    With  fair  competition  and  respect  for  the 

benefits  that come  from having business  form diversity then there  is every opportunity to 

ensure that the future of European retailing will be competitive, dynamic and progressive for 

the greater good of European consumers.  

63 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Final Report 

Levelling the Playing Field 2.0 

5.9  Unfortunately, the interpretation and application of existing EU competition law is hindering 

the organisational effectiveness of independent retailer groups  – either directly by limiting 

the extent of arrangements or indirectly by causing legal uncertainty as to whether related 

practices  will  or  will  not  be  allowed.    The  current  framework  of  legal  treatment  for 

independent retailer groups according to their horizontal (i.e. co-operative) and vertical (i.e. 

trading) nature is therefore retarding the efficiency and competitive ability of independent 

retailers, and thereby hindering the competitive process as a whole.    

5.10 

Importantly, this report’s call for ending or at least limiting such policy discrimination is not 

about protecting competitors, but rather about protecting competition by ensuring a more 

even playing field that provides greater opportunity for competition to operate in a manner 

that can best ensure that consumers are well served by retail markets. 

5.11  What is required is a suitable change in policy treatment based on recognition of the ways in 

which  current  policy  application  is  acting  to  discriminate  against  such  organisations  and 

undermine  their  competitive  ability.    To  be  clear,  this  does  not  entail  action  intended  to 

provide  independent  retailers  with  undue  favourable  treatment,  allowing  them  to  gain  an 

unfair advantage over integrated chains.  Rather, it is concerned with redressing the current 

imbalance in respective treatment and allowable practices by integrated chains compared to 

independent retailers operating as members of a buying, marketing or retail chain group. 

5.B  Specific policy measures 

5.12  The evidence and analysis gathered in this report shows key areas requiring areas requiring 

policy  attention.    This  is  in  both  the  respect  of  ending  policy  discrimination  (vis-à-vis  the 

freedom  enjoyed  by  integrated  retailers)  that  serves  against  consumers  by  preventing 

behaviour and agreements that if permitted would be in their interests, and in clarifying the 

market  circumstances  and  conditions  where  practices  (and  their  precise  form)  should  be 

allowed (given the present legal uncertainty facing most independent retailer groups). 

5.13  As  a  starting  point,  EC  competition  policy  rules  and  guidance  on  horizontal  and  vertical 

agreements  need  to  make  an  appropriate  and  clear  distinction  between  inter-  and  intra- 

organisational  relationships.    Existing  EC  policy  is  geared  towards  considering  anti-

competitive agreements between different organisations, but without distinction applies the 

same reasoning and analysis to agreements inside those organisations where the parts are 

64 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Final Report 

Levelling the Playing Field 2.0 

not integrated by common ownership.  This has a particular bearing on independent retailer 

groups  because  their  operations  are  treated  as  merely  contracting  relationships  between 

separate  legal  parties,  when  in  fact  they  are  about  operations  in  a  unified  and  cohesive 

system  that  are  integral  to  the  organisation.    The  overlooked  point  is  that  independent 

retailer  groups  are  organisations,  not  “associations”,  where  the  parties  involved  in  the 

unified/cohesive system work to the same ends, projecting the same goals, having the same 

values,  and  wanting  the  same  successes.  This  does  not  make  them  integrated  single  firms 

(like a corporate retail chain) but still means that the parties in the group function within a 

broad  hybrid  organisational  structure  that  is  fundamentally  different  as  to  how  “external” 

trade works, between completely separate organisations. 

5.14  The  consequence  of  not  making  an  adequate  distinction  between  inter-  and  intra- 

organisational  relationships  is  that  it  there  are  longstanding  issues  arising  from  the 

interpretation  and  policy  guidance  affecting  independent  retailer  group  which  typically 

entail  a  mixed  structure  of  vertical  and  horizontal  relationships.    The  next  review  of  EC 

competition  policy  rules  and  guidance  on  vertical  and  horizontal  agreements  needs  to 

address  the  distinction  between  inter-  and  intra-  organisational  relationships,  and  identity 

appropriate treatment and clarity on the competition rules for independent retailer groups 

and other hybrid types of organisations caught in the same situation. 

5.15  As  highlighted  in  Sections  1  and  4,  and  detailed  in  Appendix  D,  there  are  a  series  of 

longstanding issues over policy restrictions and rules that are impeding independent retailer 

groups  and  undermining  effective  and  fair  retail  competition.    In  particular,  European 

competition  policy  rules  and  guidance  need  reviewing  and  amending  in  respect  of  the 

following  five  key  aspects  impeding  the  efficiency  and  competitiveness  of  independent 

retailer groups:  

i. 

ii. 

Discriminatory legal treatment in regard to permitted vertical and horizontal control 

(which favour integrated retailer chains over independent retailer chains) 

Duration  and  percentage  share  limits  to  pro-competitive  agreements  on  joint 

purchasing and joint marketing 

iii. 

Legal  uncertainty  hanging  over  existing 

trading,  supply  and  distribution 

arrangements 

iv. 

Arbitrary  market  share  thresholds  used  in  European  Commission  (EC)  rules  and 

guidance on vertical and horizontal agreements 

65 

 
 
 
 
Final Report 

Levelling the Playing Field 2.0 

v. 

Continuing  scepticism  and  distrust  towards  common  pricing  and  resale  price 

maintenance  (RPM)  despite  clear  economic  benefits  in  the  context  of  use  within 

independent retailer groups 

5.16  The chief focus of this report, though, is on competition policy shortcomings that have come 

to  the  fore  more  recently,  and  especially  with  the  emergence  on  the  New  Retail  era.  

Specifically, the rapid changes currently taking place in the retailer sector mean that there 

are three urgent matters where independent retailer groups now need clear policy guidance 

and support: 

I. 

Coordinated  multichannel  retailing:  With  the  rapid  growth  of  online  retailing,  and 

especially  as  online  grocery  sales  take  off,  competition  rules  need  to  allow 

independent  retailer  groups  the  freedom  to  develop  centralised  online  and 

coordinated  multichannel  retail  operations.  Competition  rules  should  allow 

independent retailer groups to have the facility to centralise pricing and sales data 

handling to ensure that the multichannel (online) system is suitably coordinated to 

support a smooth and seamless retail operation for consumers.  The alternative of 

an uncoordinated  decentralised online operation entails considerable inefficiencies 

and represents a poor substitute to the coordinated online operations of integrated 

retailers and retail tech giants. 

II. 

Selective distribution: With the rapid growth of multichannel retailing (online and in 

store)  there  is  now  a  greater  need  for  clarifying  rules  surrounding  selective 

distribution to ensure that physical stores remain competitive with online stores and 

that competition is fair.39 

III. 

Franchising rules: With the uncertainty over franchising rules, clarification is needed 

for independent retailer groups’ contractual relationships to ensure that wholesaler-

retailer franchise relationships (like in symbol groups) are not subject to franchising 

rules  designed  to  regulate  business-format  franchises  and  manufacturer-dealer 

franchises.40 

39 See Section 2D on the need for clarification on the rules for selective distribution in this context.  
40  See  Section  3C  on  the  differences  between  independent  retailer  groups  and  franchise  systems, 
where both entail a coherent and unified organisation system but are fundamentally different in the 
manner of their control, how membership/contracts work, and the alignment of interests. 

66 

 
 
 
 
                                                      
Final Report 

Levelling the Playing Field 2.0 

5.17  The first  of these three  matters  is the most  pressing  and the most  substantial concern, as 

articulated throughout this report because it is intrinsic to omnichannel retailing in the New 

Retail  era.    If  not  quickly  addressed  then  the  result  could  be  fundamental  harm  to  the 

competitiveness  of  retail  markets.    Specifically,  competition  policy  needs  to  allow,  rather 

than  prevent  and  deny,  independent  retailer  groups  the  opportunity  to    develop  efficient 

and competitive online and omnichannel retail systems which can compete effectively with 

integrated  retailers  and  retail  tech  giants,  and  so  help  avoid  the  risk  of  monopolisation  in 

tippy retail markets.  

5.18  To  move  forward  with  confidence  in  making  appropriate  investments  in  online  and 

omnichannel  retail  operations,  independent  retailer  groups  urgently  need  clarity  over  EC 

competition policy rules and guidance in relation to online sales and multichannel retailing 

and  consider  legislating  if/where  the  existing  rules  are  deemed  insufficient  to  address  the 

concerns  identified  in  this  report.    In  doing  so,  there  should  be  consideration  of  existing 

national  legislation  that  provides  such  clarity  for  independent  retail  groups  –  for  example, 

the  French  Commercial  Code  on  retailer  cooperatives’  permitted  activities  illustrated  in 

Appendix C.  

5.19  For independent  retailer  groups, the greatest urgency for clarity on competition rules  that 

would better support competition in multichannel retailing concerns how these groups are 

allowed to market and price their goods and services to consumers in respect of the needed 

use of three practices: 

(1)  Joint  commercialisation  and  information  sharing  for  efficient  and  effective  pricing 

and promotion 

(2)  Maximum  resale  price  maintenance  (maximum  RPM)  to  guarantee  fairness  to 

consumers through capped prices  

(3)  Common prices online and generally where necessary to ensure clarity, consistency 

and fairness in the retail offer to consumers 

(1) Joint commercialisation and information sharing for efficiency and effectiveness  

5.20  Having  a  clear  and  consistent  pricing  and  promotion  strategy  is  the  single most  important 

element  in the means by which retailers compete against  each other for the patronage of 

consumers.  This is particularly so if they are selling generally the same goods and offering 

comparable retail services, especially when selling online  where  consumers actively search 

for  the  best  prices.    In  these  circumstances,  it  is  crucial  for  a  group  of  retailers  to  be 

67 

 
 
 
 
 
Final Report 

Levelling the Playing Field 2.0 

competitive  on  prices  that  are  indicative  of  the  overall  value-for-money  offer  being 

presented to consumers.  This is most  apparent  in respect of  prices in  the  following three 

respects: 

  prices used in advertising campaigns (which reflect the overall group image) 

  prices on products in the stores’ basic assortment (like “known value items”  which 

often drive stores’ footfall by influencing which stores shoppers will choose to visit) 

  prices  for  private  labels  (as  these  directly  relate  to  the  group’s  image,  brand 

positioning and point of distinction from the products offered by rival groups)  

5.21 

In  regard  to  setting  prices  in  these  three  respects,  there  is  a  compelling  case  that 

independent retailer groups should be allowed to exercise suitable control over retail pricing 

if they are to be truly effective retail operators and provide consumers with the maximum 

level  of  benefits  that  can  be  achieved.    In  particular,  allowing  central  control  of  pricing  in 

such specific instances is justifiable for the sake of delivering a clear, consistent and unified 

offer to consumers that will be beneficial to shoppers and pro-competitive.  Furthermore, by 

controlling  prices  only  for  these  specific  circumstances  then  there  will  still  be  sufficient 

freedom  for  independent  retailer  members  to  set  their  own  prices  elsewhere,  so 

safeguarding  intra-group  and  intra-brand  competition  if  this  is  otherwise  a  competition 

concern.  

5.22  Central to the need by an independent retailer group in coordinating online and offline retail 

operations,  there  necessarily  has  to  be  an  efficient  and  effective  exchange  of  sales 

information  across  the  group  along  with  information  on  pricing  and  adherence  to  joint 

marketing  and  prescribed  product  ranges  to  facilitate  joint  commercialisation.  This 

information exchange is crucial for the efficiency of logistics, stock replenishment and supply 

operations along with assuring local product availability for the benefit of consumers.  This 

information  exchange  is  also  vital  in  enabling  the  group  to  respond  quickly  to  changing 

market  circumstances  and  competitive  moves  by  rival  retail  organisations  to  initiate  price 

changes and other marketing responses to ensure competitiveness.   

5.23  Accordingly,  it  is  essential  that  independent  retailer  groups  have  clear  competition  policy 

guidance  on  permissible  forms  of  information  exchange  that  recognise  and  support  joint 

commercialisation  activities  that  promote  efficiency  and  competitiveness  and  so  help 

maintain competitive retail markets and work to the advantage of consumers.  

(2) Maximum RPM to guarantee fairness to consumers through capped prices   

68 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Final Report 

Levelling the Playing Field 2.0 

5.24  The ability of independent retailer groups to require retail members to adhere to maximum  

resale  prices  can  benefit  consumers  and  be  pro-competitive  when  they  serve  to  suppress 

prices  and  ensure  that  any  localised  market  power  is  not  abused  which  otherwise  would 

hurt  the  organisation  overall  by  reducing  sales.    This  comes  down  to  identifying  the  true 

purpose of setting maximum resale prices when it helps promote competition.  This is most 

evidently  the  case  when  applied  to  specific  types  of  products  and  specific  circumstances, 

notably  advertised  items,  price  promotions,  loss-leaders,  basis  assortment  goods,  and 

private  label  goods.    In  these  cases,  restrictions  on  raising  prices  through  maximum  RPM 

have  the  most  direct  and  beneficial  effect  for  the  group  in  promoting  its  competitive 

position with rival retail groups for the greater benefit of consumers.  

5.25 

If  it  is  clear  that  the  purpose  of  price  ceilings  is  to  limit  prices,  and  not  as  a  means  to 

coordinate high prices by the notified levels acting as focal prices, then it seems reasonable 

to allow maximum resale price obligations.   

5.26  There  is  good  reason  that  this  should  apply  even  in  situations  where  the  market  share  is 

significantly  in  excess  of  the  arbitrary  30%  market  share  threshold  specified  in  the  EC’s 

guidance on vertical agreements.  Indeed, in cases where there are very high market share 

levels  in  retail  markets,  the  practice  may  be  a  very  useful  way  of  preventing  individual 

retailer members from exploiting local market power. For example, maximum RPM can be a 

very effective and direct tool to ensure fair pricing when local competition is absent or weak 

(e.g.  in  remote  rural  areas  or  socially  deprived  urban  areas,  especially  as  low-income 

consumers in these areas may be particularly harmed by high prices).  

5.27  Accordingly,  there  is  a  clear  need  for  competition  policy  guidance  that  recognises  the 

benefits  of  intra-group  RPM  that  creates  price  ceilings  suiting  the  retail  image  of  the 

independent  retail  group  yet  still  gives  local  retail  entrepreneur  members  flexibility  to 

discount prices as they consider appropriate for their own local circumstances.  

(3)  Common  prices  to  ensure  clarity,  consistency  and  fairness  in  the  retail  offer  to 

consumers 

5.28  While  maximum  RPM  has  general  merit  for  independent  retailer  groups,  independent 

retailer groups may also have a need for common fixed prices.  In this regard, there is a need 

for competition policy to make  a sensible judgement  over situations where  common  fixed 

prices  (whether  set  horizontally  as  common  prices  across  retail  members  or  operated 

through  vertically-controlled  RPM)  are  just  a  promotional  tool  as  opposed  to  an  anti-

69 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Final Report 

Levelling the Playing Field 2.0 

competitive collusive arrangement.  The former is much more likely to take precedence over 

worries about the latter in the following five circumstances: 

(i) 

the products with common fixed prices are limited in number 

(ii)  the duration of the agreement is short term (e.g. a two-week promotion)  

(iii)  the  fixed  prices  relate  a  manufacturer  sponsored  price  promotion  (such  as  a 

discount on a newly introduced or amended product to encourage consumer trial) 

(iv)  the fixed prices apply to a price promotion helping to develop the price image of the 

group and intended to build consumer demand 

(v)  the group faces effective competition from rival retail groups 

5.29 

In particular, it would be helpful if competition policy guidance gave clear  recognition that 

the  emergence  of  multichannel  retailing  has  brought  the  need  for  common  prices  across 

retail modes to the fore.  With consumers no longer limited to shopping at specific stores in 

a given locality, but able to buy goods nationally or even internationally, then the need for 

joint  commercialisation  becomes  ever  more  essential  for  effective  multichannel  retail 

operations.  In particular, common prices can be required to sustain new modes of retailing 

and service provision that have clear consumer benefits.   

5.30  Whether independent retailer  groups choose  to develop online operations to complement 

their  physical  store  network  through  a  centralised  or  decentralised  online  operation  then 

they  benefit  from  having  a  clear  and  consistent  retail  offer  that  matches  up  across  their 

online  operations.  This  clarity  and  consistency  helps  the  consumer  make  effective 

purchasing  choices  and  helps  promote  competition  across  retail  organisations  by  making 

prices transparent to facilitate consumer search and assist  consumers in making purchases 

that offer the best value for money to suit their needs and convenience.  Competition policy 

guidance  needs  to  recognise  and  support  the  benefits  of  common  prices  in  these 

circumstances.  

Consumer welfare 

5.31  The New Retail era promises the consumer the ultimate convenience of shopping flexibility 

to  buy  anything,  anywhere,  anytime.    To  deliver  on  this  promise  requires  very  substantial 

investment  by  retailer  organisations,  ideally  supported  by  an  assurance  that  policymakers 

will regulate  the  playing field to allow  them to compete  fairly with each other and not  be 

disadvantaged  by  policy  rules  that  unreasonably  discriminate  against  some  retail  chains 

merely because of their ownership and control structure.    

70 

 
 
 
 
 
Final Report 

Levelling the Playing Field 2.0 

5.32  From  a  competition  policy  perspective  applicable  to  European  retailing,  there  has  never 

been  a  more  important  time  to  establish  a  level  playing  field  between  different  retail 

business  forms  as  the  retail  technology  revolution  unfolds.    Unless  policy  action  is  taken 

soon  to  level  the  playing  field  then  competition  will  be  distorted  in  favour  of  the  leading 

integrated retailers and the retail technology giants, inevitably concentrating retail markets 

and reducing consumer choice with independent retailer groups hindered by outmoded and 

flawed policy rules.  Instead, if permitted greater flexibility in how they conduct their retail 

business  operations  then  independent  retailer  groups  would  be  better  able  to  take 

advantage  of  new  retail  technology  to  compete  on  more  equal  terms,  and  so  stimulate 

greater competition and provide more choice and value for consumers.  

71 

 
 
 
 
 
Final Report 

Levelling the Playing Field 2.0 

APPENDICES 

72 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Final Report 

Levelling the Playing Field 2.0 

APPENDIX A 

Questionnaire on behalf of Independent Retail Europe  
for study by Professor Paul Dobson 

Contact details  
Organisation name:  
Your name (and position):  
Address:  
Email:  
Telephone number:  

1 
retail members 
1.1 

Background  information  about  your  organisation  and  relationships  with 

In what year was your organisation with its present name and structure formed? 

Can your organisation be traced back to an earlier start date with a different name 
1.2 
or  structure?  If  so,  what  was  the  year  when  the  earliest  form  of  the  organisation  was 
created? 

1.3  What  term  or  phrase  best  describes  the  nature  of  your  organisation  (e.g. 
independent  retailer  group,  voluntary  membership  group,  retail  cooperative,  franchise 
association, etc)? 

1.4  What is the purpose of your organisation? 

1.5  What are the primary roles that your organisation undertakes? Please list your five 
most important functions. 

Does  your  organisation  directly  represent 

1.6 
independent  retailer  members  or 
indirectly  through  other  intermediary  associations?  If  the  latter,  how  are  these  member 
associations organised (e.g. geographically or by retailer type)? 

How is your organisation governed in respect of its relationships with intermediary 

1.7 
association members (if you have any) through to individual retailer members? 

1.8  Who  owns  your  organisation  e.g.  a  co-operative,  holding  agency,  owned  by 
individual retailer members, wholesaler, etc? 

How 
1.9 
organisation? 

is  the  central  office  managed  and  how  are  decisions  taken  by  your 

1.10  What distinguishes your organisation and its relationship with retail members from 
(i)  an  (horizontally  and  vertically)  integrated  retailer  organisation  or  (ii)  franchising 
organisation?  

2. Independent retailer membership and performance 

73 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Final Report 

Levelling the Playing Field 2.0 

How  many  independent  retailer  members  does  your  organisation  directly  or 

2.1 
indirectly represent and what is their combined turnover (i.e. total sales revenue)? 

Do  you  ever  gain  or  lose  retail  members  from  or  to  a  rival  organisation?  If  so,  on 

2.2 
what scale and frequency?  

How  does  your  organisation  or  member  organisations  define  “independent 

2.3 
retailer”? 

2.4  What is the process by which independent retailers can become members? What, if 
any,  are  the  fees  or  costs  for  membership  (e.g.  a  joining  fee,  annual  membership  fee, 
individual  service  fees)  and  do  the  fees  vary  according  to  services  provided  or  volume  of 
trade? 

2.5  What proportion (%) of your retail members operate single outlets (as opposed to 
multiple outlets)? 

2.6  What types of goods do your independent retail members sell (e.g. grocery, sports, 
electronics, white goods, etc) and, if multiple product types, in what proportion? 

How  are  Internet  sales  managed  by  the  organisation  and  its  membership  (e.g. 

2.7 
centralised or left to individual retail members to create and run their own websites)?  

2.8 
Over  the  last  decade  has  the  combined  turnover,  profit  and  market  share  of  your 
retail members increased or decreased (and by how much)? What has been the key driver of 
this  change  in  combined  turnover,  profit  and  market  share  (e.g.  change  in  membership, 
change in strength of existing competitors, or emergence of new competition)? 

2.9 
In  what  ways,  if  any,  are  your  retail  members  impeded  by  regulatory  or  legal 
requirements in competing on effective terms with other forms of retailers (e.g. integrated 
retailers  or  franchised  retailers)?  Are  these  impediments  avoidable  (e.g.  with  a  different 
organisational structure)? 

2.10 
How  have  recent  business  developments  such  as  the  growth  of  online  platforms 
(eBay/Amazon etc.) and regulatory concerns over selective distribution affected your ability 
to compete? 

Contractual agreements and arrangements 
3. 
3.1 
In respect of the following contractual obligations on independent retailer members, 
which  ones  do  your  organisation/associations  use,  to  what  extent  are  they  used,  what 
product coverage applies, and for what reason are they used (i.e. intended benefits to the 
organisation, retailer members and final consumers): 

Retail member obligations 

Exclusive purchasing 
Minimum proportion purchasing 
Exclusive territories 
Selective distribution 
Fixed retail prices 

Usage 
(always, 
sometimes 
or never?) 

Coverage 
(all/some/n
o 
products?) 

Reason for use 

74 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Final Report 

Levelling the Playing Field 2.0 

Minimum retail prices 
Maximum retail prices 
Prices set within suggested range 
Common prices for price promotions 
Common prices for Internet retailing 
Promotion and advertising requirements 
Non-compete with centralised Internet sales 
Required purchasing of set product lines 
Full-line forcing (i.e. have to sell all products) 
Use specified logistics provider 
Use specified store service provider (e.g. for 
maintenance, cleaning, storage servicing) 
Use specified staff training 
Store name and store branding requirements 
Store layout and planogram requirements 
Others (please specify) 

To what extent are these obligations necessary for the sake of conducting business 

3.2 
on an efficient basis? Are there less restrictive alternatives available (please specify)?  

3.3  What  services  or  terms  of  trade  are  you  unable  to  provide  to  your  independent 
retailer members because of (a) the organisation’s present structure and remit, and (b) legal 
impediments or regulations? 

3.4  What additional costs (and on what scale) would be incurred by independent retailer 
members  if  they  were  not  members  of  your  organisation?  (For  example,  fixed  costs  of 
negotiation,  higher  purchase  prices,  or  lower  economies  of  scale.  Please  indicate  the 
percentage increase in costs that independent retailer members would typically face if they 
stopped being members of your organisation for given alternatives). 

3.5  Why do your independent retailer members wish to remain as independent and not 
be  part  of  a  (horizontally  and  vertically)  integrated  retail  organisation  or  franchise 
organisation? 

3.6  What advantages do integrated firms, franchise system or other retail organisational 
structures have that your members do not have? Why is this the case? 

Policy issues 

4 
National policy 
4.1 
impact and impede your organisation and independent retailer members? 

In  what  demonstrable  ways  does  national  or  federal/regional  competition  policy 

Have  there  been  any  national  decisions  (directly  or  indirectly)  relevant  to  the 
4.2 
respect  of  market  definition, 
retailing 
permitted/prohibited practices, and/or mergers  that are influencing the business  practices 
and contractual arrangements for your organisation and membership? 

served  by  your  members 

sector 

in 

4.3  What  aspects  of  current  national  competition  authority  policy  are  giving  your 
organisation  and  membership  most  concern?  (For  example,  market  definition,  restrictive 

75 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Final Report 

Levelling the Playing Field 2.0 

practices,  horizontal  agreements,  and  vertical  agreements  such  as  franchising  or  selective 
distribution rules). 

4.4 
Are there any specific restrictions set out by your national (or regional) competition 
authority  or  other  national  regulator  regarding  co-operative  agreements  /  buying 
organisations / associations of independent companies? (For example, market share limits, 
legislative restrictions or regulations) 

4.5  What  elements  of  national  policy  impede  your  organisation  and  members  with 
respect  to  their  ability  to  compete  on  effective  terms  and  so  could  be  detrimental  to 
supporting effective competition and harmful to consumers? 

4.6  What,  if  any,  horizontal  and  vertical  relationships  in  your  organisation  have  been 
reviewed, investigated or commented on by the national competition authority or a court of 
law? Under what terms have these been permitted, limited or prohibited? 

4.7  What, if any, policy/regulation benefits are available in other EU Member States to 
equivalent organisations and members that your own organisation and members are unable 
to enjoy because of present national policy/regulations?  

Are  you  aware  of  any  imminent  policy  changes,  industry  reviews,  or  relevant 

4.8 
company/merger investigations? If so please provide details. 

European policy 
4.9 
organisation and independent retailer members? 

In  what  ways  does  current  European  (EU)  competition  policy 

impact  your 

4.10  What would you like changed and why? (Please provided a rank order and say how 
these  changes  would  benefit  or  hinder  your  organisation,  independent  retailer  members, 
and end-customers? 

4.11  What alternative options would you wish to put forward for policy change that could 
be justified as being the least restrictive to achieve the required benefits? 

Are there dissenting views amongst your independent retailer members on the most 

4.12 
urgently required policy changes? If so, please provide details. 

4.13  What aspects of your organisation do you consider may face possible challenges by 
competition authorities in the future? What would happen if you were no longer able to use 
these  arrangements?  How  would  these  changes  benefit  or  hinder  your  organisation, 
independent retailer members, and end-customers? 

4.14  What emerging or future features of competition are likely to put your organisation 
and  membership  at  a  (further)  competitive  disadvantage  if  changes  to  policy  are  not 
forthcoming? 

76 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Final Report 

Levelling the Playing Field 2.0 

APPENDIX B 

RESULTS AND FINDINGS FROM THE QUESTIONNAIRE 
STUDY 

B1 Background and Summary 

B1.1 General information on the questionnaire 

To gather primary-sourced information and data, a questionnaire study was undertaken  at 

the start of 2017 with the aim of gaining information and insights on the economic, political 

and  legal  context  in  which  independent  retailer  groups  operate  and  the  factor influencing 

their ability to be competitive and efficient.  A key objective of the questionnaire study was 

to  elicit  information  from  a  perspective  as  wide  as  possible  in  relation  to  (a)  geographic 

coverage  (with  responses  sought  from  organisations  in  as  many  EU  member  states  as 

possible),  (b)  product  coverage  (with  responses  sought  from  organisations  representing 

members  in  the  food  and  a  range  of  non-food  sectors),  (c)  organisational  coverage 

(representing  the  different  of  organisational  structures  that 

independent  retailer 

associations  might  take),  and  (d)  representative  coverage  (with  responses  sought  from 

different sized organisations, in different market and competitive positions). 

Given  that  responding  to  the  questionnaire  requires  time  and  effort  on  behalf  of 

respondents, considerable care was taken over the design of the questionnaire to focus on 

information  pertinent  to  the  organisation  and  its  performance  and  for  which  direct 

information  was  required  in  a  consistent  manner  across  surveyed  independent  retailer 

groups.  To keep the questionnaire as short and focused as possible, consultations were held 

with  Independent  Retail  Europe  (hereafter  “IRE”)  (as  the  key  pan-European  body 

representing most associations and independent retailer groups operating in the European 

Union)  to  help  ensure  that  the  questions  were  well-defined  and  that  the  information 

requested would feed into the relevant economic and policy analysis.  To make the process 

of  completing  the  questionnaires  as  convenient  as  possible,  the  questionnaire  was  made 

available in the three working languages used by Independent Retail Europe (and therefore 

by  member  associations/independent  retailer  groups  targeted  with  the  questionnaire), 

namely  English,  French  and  German.  Responses  were  returned  by  email,  and  then  all 

77 

 
 
 
 
Final Report 

Levelling the Playing Field 2.0 

responses  were  translated  into  English  to  facilitate  generating  the  results  and  findings 

reported here.   

Due to the confidential nature of some of the responses, information cannot be revealed on 

an individual basis but rather information is used to present an aggregate picture of the role 

and  concerns  of  independent  retailer  groups  in  Europe  as  well  as  using  anonymised 

quotations to illustrate and explain more involved or nuanced points and arguments. 

B1.2 Questionnaire design and structure 

The full questionnaire (English version) used in the study is reproduced in Appendix A.  The 

questionnaire is divided into four sections.  In total, the questionnaire asks for information in 

respect  of  forty  questions,  with  the  intention  of  soliciting  mainly  qualitative  information 

from respondents, along with some quantitative information. 

The  first  section  covers  general  background  information  relating  to  the  representative 

group.    For  example,  it  covers  the  organisation’s  age,  general  aims,  role  and  purpose, 

ownership, governance and management structure, and distinctiveness from other forms of 

retailer. 

The  second  section seeks  background  information  on  independent  retailer  members.   The 

questions  concern  the  number  of  retailers  represented  and  their  combined  turnover, 

whether members are ever gained from or lost to a rival organisation, the definition applied 

to  the  term  “independent  retailer”,  the  process  by  which  retailers  can  become  members, 

the balance of single outlet versus multiple outlet members, what types of goods members 

sell, how internet sales are organised, how turnover, profit and market share of the group 

has changed over the last decade, whether regulation or legal requirements have impeded 

competitiveness, and the effects of recent business developments (such as online platforms 

and how selective distribution might have changed). 

The third section requests information on contractual agreements and arrangements, such 

as vertical and horizontal agreements with association and/or retail members,  the benefits 

of  such  agreements,  the  economic  necessity  of  arrangements,  the  services  and  terms  of 

trade  that  cannot  be  provided,  costs  of  alternative  arrangements,  and  advantages  of 

integrated firms or franchise systems over independent retailer groups. 

78 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Final Report 

Levelling the Playing Field 2.0 

The  fourth  section  looks  at  public  policy  issues  at  national  and  European  levels,  including 

impacts arising from relevant competition policy decisions or imminent developments (e.g. 

regarding  market  definition,  mergers,  and  vertical  and  horizontal  agreements),  and 

consideration  of  desirable  alternative  policies,  especially  in  view  of  emerging  or  future 

features that could put independent retailer groups at a (further) competitive disadvantage 

if changes to policy are not forthcoming.  

The Appendix is structured in a manner that presents and discusses the questionnaire survey 

findings on each of these aspects separately in successive sections (sections 2-5 below).  

B1.3 Questionnaire responses and sample size and characteristics 

The  questionnaire  was  originally  sent  out  in  December  2016  to  each  of  the  23  direct 

member groups and associations of Independent Retail Europe and with some associations 

then  forwarding  the  questionnaire  to  groups  within  their  association,  identified  to  us  as 

representing  or  explicitly  serving  independent  retailers  (and  in  some  cases  covering  other 

providers and artisans directly supplying consumers).   

Independent  Retail  Europe  direct  member  associations  are  a  mix  of  apex  organisations 

acting  as  (national)  associations  representing  the  interests  of  a  range  of  different 

independent retailer groups (e.g. ZGV, FCA and SECOF), trade associations supporting small 

and independent retailers specific to a sector (e.g. ACTO, ACS and RGDATA for convenience 

stores),  international groups with national organisation  strictures (e.g.  Euronics and  Expert 

in  electronics/electrical  goods  and  INTERSPORT  and  Sport  2000  in  sporting  and  leisure 

goods), individual organisations (nationally or internationally operating)  for specific sectors 

(e.g.  Kesko,  ICA,  SPAR,  EDEKA  and  REWE  Group  predominantly  operating  in  the  grocery 

sector,  3e  in  tools  and  hardware),  national  cooperative  associations  (e.g.  CONAD),  and 

intermediaries  facilitating  trade  across  multiple  countries  (e.g.  Markant).    Some  of  the 

individual  groups  may  be  members  directly  of  Independent  Retail  Europe  as  well  as 

indirectly  through  a  broad  association  (e.g.  EDEKA  and  Système  U  as  direct  Independent 

Retail  Europe  members,  as  well  as  indirect  representation  through  respectively  ZGV  and 

FCA).   

79 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Final Report 

Levelling the Playing Field 2.0 

In order to obtain information and views at different organisational and association levels, 

all  Independent  Retail  Europe  direct  members  were  contacted  and  asked  to  complete  the 

questionnaire. 

  Of  the  23  direct  members,  13  responded  by  returning  completed 

questionnaires (i.e. a response rate of 57%).  Additionally, one pan-European direct member 

requested two national associations to complete the survey, in order to provide more direct 

information  on  independent  retailer  members.    Moreover,  ZGV  (as  a  representative 

organisation for a wide range of individual independent retailer groups) asked the groups it 

represented to complete the questionnaire, of which 21 ZGV members duly responded.  

In total, 36  organisations  completed and returned the  questionnaire  by April 2017.  These 

respondent organisations represented 11 different countries in terms of the location of their 

headquarters and with a mix of national associations and associations covering multiple EU 

countries.  However, the degree to which respondents provided full answers to all questions 

varied  widely.  Most  respondents  did  not  provide  answers  to  all  of  the  questions.  

Furthermore, different interpretations to required data in some instances also restricted the 

comparability  of  responses  to  some  questions  across  the  organisations.    Accordingly,  the 

sample of organisations considered in the analysis varies for each question. The descriptions 

and  discussion  of  the  results  given  in  this  Appendix are  based  on only  those  answers  that 

could be clearly interpreted. 

B1.4 Key findings 

As a summary, and to provide some direction to the more detailed analysis of the responses 

discussed below, the key findings of the questionnaire study were found to be as follows:  

Characteristics of responding organisations and independent retailer groups 

The  information  provided  by  respondents  to  the  questionnaire  shows  that  the  structure, 

functioning  and  roles  differ  widely  among  the  surveyed  organisations.    The  purpose  and 

primary  roles  of  the  organisations  varied  by  their  type,  their  membership  representation, 

and  the  sectors  in  which  they  operate.      In  respect  of  functioning,  decision-making  and 

ownership,  again  there  is  a  wide  diversity  demonstrated  across  respondents, where  many 

had  a  central  office  organised  by  an  executive  board  and  with  management  aided  by  an 

advisory  council  or  direct  representation  or  shareholding  through  members,  while  other 

respondents have a permanent secretary  and yet others  managed by working groups. The 

heterogeneity  in  the  organisation  of  respondents  demonstrates  the  wide  range  of 

80 

 
 
 
 
 
Final Report 

Levelling the Playing Field 2.0 

characteristics  of  independent  retailer  groups,  typically  shaped  according  to  the  market, 

legal and historical context in which they operate. 

Independent retailer membership and performance 

The  respondent  organisations  demonstrated  a  variety  of  processes  by  which  membership 

takes place, but often through formal process with different fees attached for membership 

or  services  provided.    Membership  was  also  seen  to  be  broadly  stable  for  most 

organisations, but in some instances there had been a loss of membership due to business 

closures.    There  was  a  broad  spread  in  terms  of  the  proportion  of  members  that  operate 

single  outlets,  ranging  from  0%  through  to  99%.    Also,  the  types  of  goods  sold  by  the 

different respondents was varied, and while grocery/food retailing was predominant there 

was a wide range of other retail sectors covered. Online retailing, though, was still relatively 

underdeveloped  for  many  but  not  all  organisations,  with  a  mix  of  business  models  for 

developing  online  retailing,  ranging  from  centralised  selling  (from  the  central  office)  to 

decentralised selling (where members operate their own online retail services and internet 

sites).  Also, performance was variable for the respondents in terms of sales, profitability and 

market share witnessed over the past decade, with some organisations growing but others 

declining in the face of strengthening and new competition, especially from discounters and 

specialist online retailers.  In terms of business development impact future performance, the 

growth of online retailers and platforms was seen as the most concerning feature, but also 

there  was  concern  expressed  about  the  restrictiveness  and  cost-increasing  aspects  of 

regulation and legal requirements. 

Contractual agreements and arrangements 

The  respondents  were  provided  with  a  list  of 19  specific  potential  obligations, as  a  mix of 

horizontal  and  vertical  agreements,  and  asked  which  of  these  were  used  with  their 

members.    The  responses were  varied,  but  in most  cases  the  organisation  eschewed  from 

using pricing restraints and only a limited amount of joint advertising and service obligation 

restraints, but more widely required members to adhere to store name and store branding 

requirements.  The reasons for their use and the benefits provided were also given.  It was 

clear  that  many  organisations  were  reluctant  to  use  a  range  of  potential  efficiency-

enhancing obligations on their members, which became more apparent when respondents 

were  asked  about  what  services  and  terms  of  trade  they  were  unable  to  provide 

independent  retailer  members  because  of  legal  impediments  and  regulations.    The 

respondents  also  provided  information  on  the  nature  and  scale  of  costs  that  retailer 

81 

 
 
 
Final Report 

Levelling the Playing Field 2.0 

members  would  incur  if  they  were  not  part  of  the  organisation,  as  well  detailing  the 

advantages  in  terms  of  superior  negotiating  position  and  consistent  branding  and  image 

with consumers favouring integrated retailers and franchise systems. 

National policy issues 

Respondents  were  asked  about  the  ways 

in  which  national  policy 

impacted  their 

organisation  and  their  independent  retailer  members.    The  respondents  provided  a  wide 

range of different examples of how regulations, bureaucracy and restrictions impeded their 

organisation  and  membership,  ranging  from  competition  policy  assessments  limiting  their 

use  of  purchasing  obligations,  price  fixing,  resale  price  maintenance  (RPM),  selective 

distribution,  joint  marketing  and  common  price  promotions  and  advertising  campaigns, 

along  with  local  restrictions  through  planning  policy,  environment  and  energy  policy,  and 

transport  policy.    The  regulations  and  restrictions  giving  respondents  most  concern  were 

those  which  other  retail  organisations  did  not  face,  such  as  online  retailers  not  facing  the 

same taxation, planning, and recycling policies, or integrated retailers being able to fix store 

prices, run national campaigns, use common branding and have full control over their stores 

enabling  them to  increase  their  negotiating  power with  suppliers  and  producers  alongside 

presenting  a  unified  brand  image  to  consumers.    In  addition,  a  number  of  respondents 

pointed  to  the  problems  of  self-assessments  required  by  their  national  competition 

authorities which provided them with considerable legal uncertainty which in turn inhibited 

them  making  important  business  investments,  notably  over  the  difficulty  of  establishing 

integrated  online  retailing  services  when  they  cannot  control  store  prices  and  product 

availability.  This  legal  uncertainty  also  carried  over  to  the  treatment  of  agreements  which 

could  serve  the  same  purpose  and  outcome  but  would  be  legally  viewed  differently 

depending  on  their  treatment  as  horizontal  or  vertical  agreements.    Respondents  also 

pointed  to  perceived  inconsistency  and  unequal  treatment  of  independent  retailer  groups 

across different EU countries.     

European policy issues 

When asked about  what  EU policy aspects they would like changed and why, respondents 

cited that the greatest hindrance to their organisations came from the treatment of vertical 

restraints  and cooperative agreements, particularly in respect of pricing restrictions where 

RPM  was  prevented  and  there  remained  legal  uncertainty  over  using  price  caps  (as  with 

maximum RPM) and common prices for promotions even though their purpose, intent and 

outcome was to keep prices down for the benefit of consumers.  In addition, concerns were 

82 

 
 
 
Final Report 

Levelling the Playing Field 2.0 

expressed about restrictions on exclusive purchasing obligations and assortment selections 

undermining efficiency and weakening negotiating positions with suppliers.  Central offices 

and  members  were  also  viewed  as  sharing  the  same  desired  policy  changes.  For  future 

competition,  the  greatest  policy  need  was  to  permit  practices  that  would  enable  efficient 

online retail systems to be created. 

B2. Background information on the membership organisation 

In the first part of the survey, respondents were asked to give background information about 

their organisation.  The responses show the different nature of independent retailer groups 

in terms of their history, development, membership size and sales turnover, roles, services, 

organisational  type,  ownership  structure,  membership  representation, and  the wide  range 

of retail sectors and services covered. 

B2.1 Respondents’ organisation age, size and retail membership 

As a starting point to illustrate the breadth of organisations covered in the survey, Table B1 

summarises the quantitative data from responses to questions Q1.1, Q1.2, Q2.1 and Q2.5 on 

the age of the organisation, the number of members represented and their sales turnover 

(in €bn), and the proportion (%) of the organisation’s retail members which operate single 

outlets (as opposed to multiple outlets).   

Table B1. Summary Statistics on Respondents 

Measure 

Mean 
Average 

Median  Standard 
Deviation 

Minimum  Maximum  Range 

Sample 
size 

Year when current 
organisation formed 

Year when original 
organisation formed 

Number of retailer 
members represented 

Retailer members’ 
total turnover in €bn 

Proportion of members 
which are single outlet 

1980 

1989 

31 

1906 

2015 

109 

36 

1962 

1965 

31 

1906 

2014 

108 

36 

3,674 

1,090 

8,335 

10 

36,000 

35,990 

31 

12.77 

2.2 

31.74 

0.03 

147 

146.97 

30 

65 

77 

30 

0 

99 

99 

29 

83 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Final Report 

retailers (%) 

Levelling the Playing Field 2.0 

Source: Analysis of responses to questions Q1.1, Q1.2, Q2.1 and Q2.5 

As Table B1 shows, the organisations span more than 100 years in terms of their age, with 

the  earliest  dating  back  to  1906  through  to  the  latest  formed  with  its  current  name  and 

structure in 2015.  To provide further illustration of the pattern and spread of organisations 

by their age, Figure B1 shows the number of respondents falling into two-decade periods for 

their current  structure and their earliest date of origin. While most of the organisations in 

their current structure have been formed in the past 30 years, the majority can point back to 

over  50  years  to  their  earliest  inception  date  in  their  original  form  where  17  of  the  36 

respondents (i.e. 47%) stated that their organisations could be traced back to an earlier state 

date with a different name or structure.    

Table B1. Period when respondent organisations were formed 

r
e
b
m
u
N

14

12

10

8

6

4

2

0

1900-19

1920-39

1940-59

1960-79

1980-99

2000-17

Two Decade Periods 

Present form

Earliest form

Source: Analysis of responses to questions Q1.1 and Q1.2 

In respect of the organisation’s size, the median membership was  just over 1,000 retailers 

but the range was from the very small with 10 members for a specialist cooperative through 

to  two  umbrella  organisations  with  each  representing  over  30,000  independent  retailers.   

Figure  B2  shows  the  number  of  respondents  in  terms  of  different  size  ranges,  where 

84 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Final Report 

Levelling the Playing Field 2.0 

between one  and two thousand members  represents the most common size band,  closely 

following by one hundred to five hundred members.   

Figure B2: Number of Independent Retailer Members 
Represented by Respondents 

r
e
b
m
u
N

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

0

Membership Size Range 

Source: Analysis of responses to question Q2.1 

Similarly, in terms of the combined retail turnover of members, the median level was €2.2bn 

but the range covered smaller organisations (from €0.03bn upwards) through to €147bn, of 

which 9 respondents had combined sales in excess of €10bn and equally 9 respondents had 

combined sales less than €1bn, with the rest in between these levels.  Figure B3 shows the 

number of respondents falling into different sales turnover size ranges. 

85 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Final Report 

Levelling the Playing Field 2.0 

Figure B3: Total Sales Turnover of Respondents 

r
e
b
m
u
N

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

0

>€100bn  €25-100bn  €10-25bn 

€2-10bn 

€1-2bn 

€0.5-1bn 

<€0.5bn 

Combined sales turnover range 

Source: Analysis of responses to question Q2.1 

In respect of the proportion of retailer members of the organisation which operate single as 

opposed to multiple outlets, the range of responses spanned from 0% (in the case of service 

intermediary) through to 99% (for a cooperative).  However, with the median value at 77%, 

most of the respondents indicated that more than 50% of their members operated as single 

outlets,  as  shown  in  Figure  B4  by  the  distribution  of  respondents  across  the  different 

percentages ranges 

Figure B4. Proportion (%) of retail members operating single 
outlets 

8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0

r
e
b
m
u
N

Decile Percentage Bands 

Source: Analysis of responses to question Q2.5 

B2.2 Respondents’ organisation nature, purpose and role 

86 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Final Report 

Levelling the Playing Field 2.0 

In terms of how the respondents describe and define their type of organisations, the term or 

phrase that they used as best describing the nature of their organisation are summarised in 

Table  B2.   One third  (12/36)  describe  their  organisation  simply  as a  group of  independent 

retailers, while others emphasise the voluntary membership nature of the group (4/36), the 

vertical structure of the retail organisation (1/36) or as a retailers’ cooperative (1/36) (i.e. as 

a  cooperative  of  retailers  as  independent  owners  as  opposed  to  a  consumer-owned  retail 

cooperative society, company or corporation).  Others have broader representation, either 

as  trade  associations  (3/36)  or  operating  as  a  group  of  retailers’  cooperatives  (3/36).  The 

organisations covered in this survey extend their interests beyond retailing goods, to cover 

particular 

specialist 

services, 

certain  professions,  wholesaling,  purchasing,  and 

manufacturing.   However, the core focus of the sample of respondents relates to retailing 

goods as sold by independent retailer members. 

Table B2. Term or Phrase Best Describing Nature of Organisation 

Nature of Organisation 

Group of independent retailers 

Voluntary membership group of independent retailers 

Wholesale cooperative 

Group of retailers’ cooperatives 

Trade association for independent retailers 

Retailers’ cooperative 

Retailing and wholesale cooperative 

Vertically structured retailer with retail entrepreneurs 

Voluntary membership group 

Purchasing group 

Service cooperation interfacing between industry and commerce 

Manufacturer cooperative 

Coalition of medical aid professionals 

Group of independent IT entrepreneurs 

Systems service provider group 

Source: Analysis of responses to question Q1.3 

Number of 
Respondents 

12 

4 

4 

3 

3 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

While  Table  B2  indicates  that  different  phrases  and  expressions  are  used  to  define  the 

groups,  their  expressed  organisational purpose  is very similar, as  summarised by Table  B3. 

Nearly  half  (17/36)  of  the  organisations  describe  their  purpose  in  terms  of  providing 

business support, but others are more specific in terms what benefits they provide stressing 

87 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Final Report 

Levelling the Playing Field 2.0 

the efficiencies to which they bring their membership in respect of scale economies (6/26), 

buying  economies  (3/36),  scale  efficiency  to  support  retail  entrepreneurs  (4/36),  or  value 

chain  optimisation  (1/36),  while  the  remaining  respondents  (5/36)  emphasise  their 

representation role.    

Table B3. Purpose of Organisation 

Organisation purpose 

Provide business support 

Scale economies for independent retailers 

Represent independent retailers 

Optimising scale efficiency to support retailer entrepreneurs 

Buying economies for independent retailers 

Value chain optimisation 

Source: Analysis of responses to question Q1.4 

Number of 
Respondents 
17 

6 

5 

4 

3 

1 

In addition, the survey participants were asked about their primary roles undertaken by their 

organisation  and  to  list  their  five  most  important  functions.    In  total  118  functions  were 

mentioned  by  respondents,  averaging  3.28  per  respondent.    Table  B4  summarises  the 

responses  and  shows  that  the  most  frequently  mentioned  roles  were  joint  purchasing, 

support  services,  joint  marketing,  public  relations,  knowledge  transfer,  training  and 

lobbying.    The  roles  span  various  aspects  of  supporting  independent  retailer  members  in 

terms of purchasing, advertising, branding, data management, financing, invoicing, logistics, 

product sourcing, property letting, store network development and trade mark protection. 

Table B4. Primary roles undertaken by respondents 

Primary roles and functions 

Frequency 

Joint purchasing 

Support services 

Joint marketing 

Public relations 

Knowledge transfer 

Training 

Lobbying 

Brand management 

Business support services 

Financial services 

Representation 

Branding 

88 

27 

24 

17 

7 

5 

5 

4 

3 

3 

3 

3 

2 

 
 
 
 
 
Final Report 

Levelling the Playing Field 2.0 

Data management 

Warehousing 

Central invoicing 

Certification 

Financing 

Logistics 

Negotiation 

Own brand development 

Product sourcing 

Research 

Retail property letting 

Store network development 

Trademark protection 

2 

2 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

TOTAL 

average per respondent 

118 

3.28 

Source: Analysis of responses to question Q1.5 

B2.3 Respondents’ organisation ownership and management structure 

In  addition  to  the  roles  and  functions  of  the  organisation,  respondents  also  supplied 

information about who owns their organisation.  As Table B5 shows, half of the responding 

organisations  are  owned  directly  by  the  cooperative  members  (9/36)  or  retailer  members 

(9/36),  with  the  remainder  a  mix  of  being  owned  by  multiple  cooperatives,  member 

shareholders,  national  representative  organisations,  or  holding  a  structure  supported  by 

association status, a cooperative subsidiary, a combination of public shareholders and retail 

members, a foundation, or as a European group of economic interests (GEIE). 

Table B5. Organisation Ownership 

Owner of the organisation 

Number 

Cooperative members 

Retail members 

Multiple cooperatives 

Member shareholders 

Partnership shares 

Member companies 

Association status 

Cooperative subsidiary 

GEIE - European group of economic interests 

Foundation 

National representative organisations 

89 

9 

9 

4 

3 

3 

2 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Final Report 

Levelling the Playing Field 2.0 

Public shareholders and retail members 

1 

Source: Analysis of responses to question Q1.8 

A common theme across the responses to ownership is the role played by members.  This is 

also  the  case  in  respect  of  how  the  responding  organisations  tend  to  be  governed  with  a 

board  or  a  council,  where  there  is  typically  retail  member  representation  but  with  overall 

management led by a chief executive officer (CEO), managing director (MD), director general 

(DG), president or secretary.   Table B6 summarises the situation for the respondents which 

shows that the most common way that the central office is managed and how decisions are 

taken by the organisation as being through a board and MD or a board and CEO, but with 

variants across the respondents. 

Table B6. Central Office Management and Organisation Decision Making 

Central office control and decision making 

Frequency 

Board and MD 

Board and CEO 

Central office and membership assembly 

Board and membership assembly 

Board and central office 

Board and DG 

Board and general assembly 

Board and President 

Board and Secretary General/President 

Central Office 

Central office and MD 

Central office and retail council 

Committees and MD 

Council and MD 

Source: Analysis of responses to question Q1.9 

14 

6 

3 

2 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

B2.4 Respondents’ retail sector coverage and distinguishing character 

The  organisations  were  asked  about  the  type  of  goods  and  services  sold  or  provided  by 

independent retail members to indicate the range of sectors of retailing in which they were 

involved (Q2.5).  Some 34 respondents identified a total of 84 types covering 43 categories.  

Of the respondents, 11 identified one category, 14 identified two categories, 4 listed three 

90 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Final Report 

Levelling the Playing Field 2.0 

categories, 2 listed four categories, and then 1 respondent each for respectively identifying 

five, eight and thirteen categories.   

The most common mentioned categories of goods and services revolved around the grocery 

sector  broadly  defined,  with  respondents  specifying  Food  (7  responses),  FMCG  (5),  and 

Grocery  (2).    However,  beyond  this,  the  mix  of  sectors  covered  was  extremely  diverse: 

Sporting  &  leisure  goods  (5);  Consumer  electronics  (4);  DIY  (4);  Domestic  appliances  (4); 

Household  goods  (4);  Tools  &  machines  (4);  Footwear  (3);  Furniture  (3);  Baked  goods  (2); 

Clothing (2); Hearing aids (2); Kitchens (2); OTC medicines (2); Vehicles (2); Accessories (1); 

Agricultural  machinery  (1);  Alcohol  (1);  Beauty  (1);  Beverages  (1);  Building  goods  (1); 

Confectionery (1); Garden Tools (1); Hardware (1); Healthcare products (1); Home & Garden 

(1); Home furnishing (1); Homewares (1); ICT products (1); Jewellery (1); Leather goods (1); 

Newspapers  &  magazines  (1);  Optical  aids  (1);  Orthopaedic  aids  (1);  Photo  Services  (1); 

Photography goods (1); Promotional items (1); Stationery (1); Tobacco products (1); Tourism 

(1); and Toys (1).  Accordingly, the respondent organisations represent a wide range of retail 

sectors  from  which  to  provide  views  about  the  effects  of  changes  in  competition  and 

developments taking place in their respective sectors. 

Respondents  were  asked  about  what  distinguished  their  organisation  and  its  relationship 

with retail members from an integrated retailer or franchising organisation, as the two other 

major  organisational  forms  that  they typically  might  face  as  competitors  in  retail  markets.  

Table B7 summarises the responses. Of the 26 responses, 10 pointed to the independence of 

their  members,  7  explicitly  focused  on  the  aspect  of  independent  retailers,  3  on  the 

organisation  as  a  cooperative,  2  on  the  voluntary  (rather  than  integrated  or  contractually 

tied) nature of membership, and 1 each for collective decision-making (rather than top down 

decision-making  or  vertical  control  via  a  franchising  relationship),  serving  as  a  democratic 

organisation,  acting  as  a  non-profit  service  for  members,  and  retail  members  as 

entrepreneurs. 

Table B7. Distinguishing feature from integrated retailer or franchising organisations 

Distinction from other organisational forms 

Frequency 

Independent members 

Independent retailers 

Cooperative 

Voluntary membership 

Collective decision making 

91 

10 

7 

3 

2 

1 

 
 
 
 
Final Report 

Levelling the Playing Field 2.0 

Democratic organisation 

Non-profit service for members 

Retail entrepreneurs 

1 

1 

1 

Source: Analysis of responses to question Q1.10 

B2.5 Respondents’ membership process 

Given that the very essence and key point of distinction for independent retailer groups are 

centred  on  the  collection,  alliance  and  collaboration  of  individual  members  with  common 

interests,  the  questionnaire  also  asked  respondents  about  the  process  by  which 

independent  retailers  can become  members of  the organisation,  and  what,  if any,  are  the 

fees  or  costs  for  membership  (Q2.4).    This  is  important  to  understand  how  the  groups 

evolve,  change  in  terms  of  their  composition  and  how  well  they  can  adapt  to  changing 

market  circumstances.  All  35  organisations  that  had  independent  retailer  members 

answered  the  question.    The  most  common  response  (11/35)  was  to  specify  that 

membership  was  through  a  cooperative  share  subscription  (notably  for  ZGV  members).  

Additionally,  a  smaller  number  of  organisations  (5)  stressed  the  formal  admissions 

procedure  and  approval  process,  often  involving  credit  checks,  a  joining  fee  and  services 

charges.    In  respect  of  membership  fees,  there  was  a  mix  of  organisations  specifically 

mentioning they charged no fees (2), monthly fees (2), annual fees (3), or without specifying 

the  frequency  of  when  fees  were  paid  (8),  with  the  fees  covering  a  mix  of  entry  fees  and 

license fees, as well as service charges. 

Competition may also exist between independent retailer groups, and so respondents were 

asked whether they ever gain or lose retail members from or to a rival organisation, and if so 

on what scale.  Of the 33 responses, 8 said they did not gain or lose members, 7 said they 

faced little change, 7 said a rarely did members join or leave, while 6 pointed to a slight gain 

in membership in recent years and 3 to a slight loss (of which 2 specified this was because of 

business closures).  Two organisations responded with a more precise  figure for the extent 

of membership churn, with 1 organisation pointing to a 2% gain in membership each year, 

and 1 organisation pointing a 2% loss in membership each year.  Based on these responses, 

most organisations have broadly stable membership, with only small gains and losses each 

year, even if competition is causing some business closures in certain retail contexts. 

B3. Market Position and Developments Impacting Competitiveness 

92 

 
 
 
 
 
Final Report 

Levelling the Playing Field 2.0 

B3.1 Respondents’ market position over the last decade 

To  ascertain  more  information  about  how  independent  retailers  had  been  performing,  we 

asked respondents to answer whether over the last decade their membership had seen an 

increase  or  decrease  in  combined  turnover,  profit  and  market  share  (Q2.8).    Of  the  32 

responses, 13 indicated that their membership had  seen a decrease, slowing or stagnation 

on these measures, with nearly all (12/13) pointing to a decline specifically due to increased 

competition, particularly around online competition with the extension of pure play online 

retailers  but  also  the  rise  of  discount  retailers  and  increased  growth  of  established 

integrated retailers.    However, 11  respondents indicated that their organisations had seen 

growth over this period from the market as a whole growing (6/11), service improvements 

and member professionalism increasing (3/11), or membership growth (2/11).  In addition, 5 

respondents  reported varied performance, with some  indicating that members with larger 

stores had performed better than members with smaller stores, with this trend exacerbated 

with  a  move  to  greater  online  consumer  purchases  impacting  the  viability  of  small  stores.  

Finally,  3  respondents  indicated  a  broadly  stable  or  static  trend  over  this  period.  

Accordingly,  taken  collectively,  the  groups  have  seen  quite  mixed  performance,  some 

suffering from increased competition, especially from online retailers, and others managing 

to grow in favourable market growth conditions, with yet others in a broadly similar position 

over the last decade. 

B3.2 Impact of recent business developments 

In respect to ongoing and future aspects that might affect the ability of independent retailer 

groups to competitive effectively, respondents were asked about how have recent business 

developments, such as the growth of online platforms (eBay, Amazon, etc.), and regulatory 

concerns,  such  over  selective  distribution,  were  affecting  their  ability  to  compete  (Q2.10).   

There were 22 detailed responses provided.  These are summarised in Table B8 and grouped 

together  (shown  in  different  colour  bands)  according  to  the  respondent’s  type  of 

organisation. 

Table B8. Recent business developments impacting ability to compete effectively 

Business developments identified as impacting ability to compete effectively  Organisation type 

Increasing price transparency and price pressure due to online sales but not competing 
on equal terms due to higher operating costs 
Aggressive competition from pure online players operating without the same overhead 
expenses as physical retailers 
Risk of e-commerce making physical stores unprofitable 

Retailer group 

Retailer group 

Retailer group 

93 

 
 
Final Report 

Levelling the Playing Field 2.0 

Online food retailing still in its infancy but growing with big investments by Amazon and 
other operators 
Online retailers benefit by not having the same recycling obligations 

Online retailers free ride on retailers' advice service 

Legal uncertainty over the new block exemption regulation for vehicles 

Online platforms used extensively for price dumping 

Smaller retailers being undermined by selective distribution system requirements and 
legal uncertainties 
Combination of selective distribution by suppliers, rise in manufacturer-owned shops and 
online shops exacerbate the competitive pressure on affiliated independent retailers 
Price dumping via online channels resulting in reduced retailer sales 

Retailer group 

Retailer group 

Retailer group 

Retailer group 

Retailer group 

Retailer group 

Retailer group 

Retailer group 

Focus on price leads to neglect of service aspects and reducing SME competitiveness 

Retailer group 

No means to enforce members to keep to brand owner set end prices 

Tightening requirements for legally compliant selective distribution agreements 
impacting independent retailers 
Manufacturer own e-commerce undermines store-based retailers 

Shift to online sales putting pressure on store-based retailers 

Online product sales have driven shift towards services and consultancy 

Selective distribution can be a means to improve quality and quantity of online retail and 
allow independent retailer groups to compete  
Online retailers free ride on the service provided by specialist retailers and sell below 
their cost 
Countering the growth of online sales to focus more on applications requiring 
consultancy from trained sales force 
Need to have ability to deny members using third-party platforms to support a common 
strategy for the group  
Shifting sales towards online 

Source: Analysis of responses to questions Q2.10 and Q1.3 

Voluntary 
membership group 
Voluntary 
membership group 
Voluntary 
membership group 
Group of 
professionals 
Group of 
professionals 
Retailers’ cooperative 

Retailers’ cooperative 

Manufacturer 
cooperative 
Trade association 

Wholesale 
cooperative 

As  evident  from  the  responses  listed  in  Table  B8,  online  developments  are  having  an 

especially  distinct  and  important  impact  on  the  respondent  organisations  and  their 

membership.  In particular, pure online players are seen as utilising to their advantage being 

able to avoid the  same overhead expenses as physical store (bricks-and-mortar) retailers as 

well as free-riding on the sales service provided by physical stores (which consumers might 

visit  first  but  then  make  purchase  online  afterwards).    Online  retailing  is  also  seen  as  a 

problematic  source  of  price  dumping,  which  some  retailers  might  use  as  a  channel  to  sell 

products at or below cost and so undermine regular competition, even to the extent of such 

action being predatory in nature or intent.   

94 

 
 
 
Final Report 

Levelling the Playing Field 2.0 

Also,  moving  forwards  in  time,  it  is  very  clear  that  respondents  are  concerned  about  the 

scale  of  investments  that  Amazon  and  other  online  players  are  making  with  future 

competition  in  mind  as  online  sales  become  larger  and  perhaps  even  dominant  in  some 

retail sectors.  On top of this, respondents as independent retailer groups and cooperatives 

also feel that they will not be able to compete on effective terms with these online players, 

exacerbated  by  the  way  that  producers  might  use  or  not  use  selective  distribution  which 

might  discriminate  against  their  membership  or  put  them  in  a  disadvantageous  market 

position,  especially  when  there  is  legal  uncertainty  about  the  legitimacy  of  using  or 

supporting  selective  distribution  that  could  help  ensure  the  viability  of  physical  stores.  

Additionally, there is concern that if groups cannot for legal or contractual reasons manage 

effectively  their  own  online  presence  then  individual  members  might  turn  to  using  third-

party online platforms and leave the group exposed to harmful intra-brand competition that 

damages  the  group’s  overall  brand  image  and  reputation  for  consistency  with  consumers, 

especially if it means that service quality suffers. 

One  particular  aspect  of  online  retailing  that  concerns  independent  retailer  groups  in 

respect of their ability to compete effectively going forwards is the effect of specialist online 

operators  cherry-picking  sales  on  certain  products,  like  best-selling  lines,  or  to  certain 

customer bases, like only in large cities.  This cherry-picking behaviour by online specialists 

can  have  the  effect of  undermining  the  overall  efficiency of  physical store  retailers  if  they 

cannot  maintain  sales  or  establish  their  own  internet  operations  to  offer  a  more 

comprehensive  service  to  benefit  consumers  more  generally  rather  than  online  specialists 

only favouring a minority of consumers, albeit the most lucrative part but to the detriment 

of  other  consumers.    As  an  illustration  of  how  this  works  in  a  market  context,  one 

respondent  (a  large  grocery  retail  organisation)  sums  up  the  situation  by  how  online 

specialists  are  using  cherry  picking  and  cross-subsidisation  (from  non-food  sales)  in  the 

grocery  sector  as  the  importance  of  online  retailing  increases  in  the  following  terms  (in 

anonymised form):  

“Internet retailing poses a special challenge... Over the last few years, there has been a 
large  number  of  new  market  players  with  online  specialist  retailers  cherry  picking 
appealing  product  ranges  with  strong  margins.  Online  retail  allows  these  new  players 
easy customer access via the Internet. Very often, these companies are able to fall back 
on experience and/or systems from online retail of non-food product ranges. Expansion is 
further  favoured  by  easy  access  to  risk  capital  and  advertising  inventory  (known  as 
‘advertising  for  equity’  deals).  This  further  increases  the  intense  competition  of  these 
important add-on product ranges for food retailing. 

95 

 
 
 
Final Report 

Levelling the Playing Field 2.0 

In terms of full product range, online retailing is still in its infancy. Demand continues to 
be  weak.  In  terms  of  supply,  nearly  all  large  food  retailers  have  launched  their  own 
projects. DHL has already entered the full-range food retail market based on its existing 
non-food  oriented  platform.  Amazon  has  been  offering  a  dry  food  range  on  its  own 
platform (Amazon Marketplace) for a long time and has supplemented this offer in 2015 
with its Prime Pantry range. Amazon has been actively operating Prime Now in key cities 
since June 2016 as an online retailer with a core product range of 4,700 items, including 
fresh, same-day delivery. Considering Amazon’s ambitious goals for growth, it is only a 
matter of time before Prime Fresh will launch a broad and specialised product range with 
its own delivery service across the country. 

The competitiveness of traditional food retailers is being threatened by market entrants 
insofar as these companies use online food retail for generating site visits and are able to 
fund it through profits from their non-food business. For independent retailer groups and 
cooperatives, and as internet sales increase then these organisations could increasingly 
find  themselves  at  a  competitive  disadvantage  compared  to  other  retail  organisation 
forms, especially if regulatory and legal restrictions pose an additional burden and act in 
a discriminatory fashion.” 

B3.3 Management and development of internet sales 

The responses  discussed above  and listed in Table  B8  illustrate  the range  of concerns that 

groups  have  about  the  shift  in  favour  of  internet  sales  and  how  retailers  geared  towards 

online  retailing  have  advantages  over  retailers  reliant  on  physical  stores,  which  could  be 

especially  exacerbated  for  independent  retailer  groups.    The  obvious  response  from 

independent  retailer  groups  might  then  be  to  respond  by  developing  their  own  online 

retailing  facility.    However,  there  are  practical  and  legal  issues  (as  indicated  in  the  above 

statement)  to  overcome  in  developing  such  a  facility  when  the  retail  members  are 

independent and there is a need for coordination to create a single, integrated facility.  This 

presents both a coordination and a contractual challenge and the respondents were asked 

how  internet  sales  are  being  managed  by  their  organisation  and  its  membership,  and 

specifically  whether  it  was  being  centralised  or  left  to  individual  retail  members  to  create 

and run their own websites (Q2.7).  Some 32 organisations responded with information to 

the question, with responses categorised by the frequency of their type as shown in Table 

B9.   

Table B9.  Internet sales management by the organisation and its membership 

Mode of Internet Sales 

Members manage their own internet sales 

No internet sales 

Not involved 

96 

Frequency 

16 

4 

2 

 
 
 
Final Report 

Levelling the Playing Field 2.0 

Central online shop with individual retailer offerings 

Centralised platform with individual members managing their own online store 

National organisation manages online sales 

Centralised online shop 

Centrally operated online shop plus individual retailer websites 

Members manage their own internet sales using common platform 

Under development 

Source: Analysis of responses to question Q2.7 

2 

2 

2 

1 

1 

1 

1 

From  Table  B9,  half  the  responses  (16/32)  point  to  the  organisation’s  members  managing 

their  own  internet  sales,  while  seven  stated  that  they  had  no  internet  sales,  were  not 

involved  in  internet  sales  or  this  was  still  under  development  by  the  organisation.    Of  the 

remaining nine organisations, only one pointed to a single centralised online shop, with all 

the others have a mix of central and devolved arrangements involving retailer members or 

national  organisations  (of  international  groups)  using  a  central  online  ship  or  centralised 

platform. 

The detailed responses to the question about how internet sales are organised reveals the 

difficulties  that  independent  retailer  groups  have  faced  and  the  slow  speed  at  which  they 

have  typically  been  able  to  respond  in  developing  online  retailing,  compared  to  the  much 

swifter  development  from  integrated  retailers  or  pure  online  retailers.    As  one  trade 

association neatly summarises in the following words there are two main business models, 

either pursuing a centralised or decentralised model, by which independent retailer groups 

and cooperatives have been able to develop internet sales, but both have their limitations 

because  of  the  coordination  and  contractual  challenge  and  the  need  for  membership 

support  while  also  abiding  by  existing  competition  laws  restricting  horizontal  and  vertical 

agreements: 

“The  retailer  groups  do  not  always  pursue  the  same  online  sales  strategies;  they  vary 
according  to  their  history,  business  sector  and  strategic  choices.    There  are  two  main 
discernible online sales models: 

-  A  centralised  model,  where  the  head  of  the  network  consolidates  all  e-commerce 
activity  either  directly,  or  via  an  intermediary  branch  under  its  control  and/or  a 
contractor. The group acts as the seller in direct contact with the end-user. It executes all 
functions  associated  with  selling  (taking  orders,  billing,  receiving  payment,  delivery, 
after-sales).  It  determines  the  price  and  receives  all  payments,  regardless  of  the  web 
user’s place of residence. 

- A decentralised model, where the potential role of the group is restricted to making a 
web  tool  with  seamless  functionalities  available,  but  without  providing  input  regarding 

97 

 
 
 
 
Final Report 

Levelling the Playing Field 2.0 

content. Each shop acts as seller for his own website or web page. He sets and amends 
prices as he sees fit. Web users choose their delivery location before examining the offer 
and placing the order directly with the distributor. With this set-up, each retailer resorts 
to the website for selling his products and services. There is no exclusive Internet offer.” 

While  both  types  of  business  model  might  be  workable,  they  are  unlikely  to  be  as 

coordinated, integrated, efficient, responsive and competitive as that which can be delivered 

by  horizontally  and  vertically  integrated  retailers,  franchise  operations  with  strong  direct 

vertical control  from franchisors, or directly from manufacturers or delivery companies (as 

new 

intermediaries)  with  strong  brands,  strong 

identification  with  consumers  and 

considerable  financial  resources  to  undertake  the  necessary  technical  and  marketing 

investments to establish a seamless, unified and consistent buying and deliver service.  The 

phrase  that  appears  apt  for  many  respondents  as  independent  retailer  groups  struggling 

with  the  development  and  coordination  of  their  own  online  retailing  operations  is 

“disjointed”.    This  applies  even  for  the  very  largest  respondent  organisations  with  deep 

resources  but  unable  to  provide  a  single,  integrated,  seamless  service.    One  respondent 

representing  a  very  large  grocery  retail  organisation  consisting  of  several  cooperatives 

discussing the development of online grocery operations summarises its own situation with 

the piecemeal fashion in which it has had to develop online retailing in the following terms 

(in anonymised form): 

“In addition to store-based food retail, distance selling also exists within the group. As of 
30 June 2016, 1,460 stores operated their own delivery service. Ordering typically takes 
place by phone, fax or email. Around 50 of these stores dispose of their own online shop. 
The group itself does not operate a central online shop. However, in one city, a subsidiary 
of the group operates an online food shop, offering a basic range of non-perishable and 
easy to move foods (dry food range) for delivery, as well as wine, spirits and coffee and a 
drive-in collection service with online ordering facility. The regional  group organisations 
in two regions support interested retailers with shop systems they developed themselves, 
which can be adapted by individual retailers to suit the respective market conditions. In 
addition,  individual  independent  retailers  operate  online  shops  under  their  own  steam, 
delivering  to  customers  in  nearby  areas.  Finally,  a  discounter  subsidiary  also  runs  an 
online shop offering almost exclusively non-food items as well as wines. 

Overall, online selling within the group is disjointed, which may have a detrimental effect 
on the development potential of this area for the group.” 

B3.4 Impediments arising from regulatory and legal requirements 

98 

 
 
 
Final Report 

Levelling the Playing Field 2.0 

The responses to questions Q2.7, Q2.8 and Q2.10 discussed above, respectively about how 

internet sales are managed, how members have been performing over the last decade, and 

the  effect  of  recent  business  developments,  frequently  made  references  to  impediments 

due to regulatory or legal requirements.  Question Q2.9 addresses this issue more directly in 

asking respondents specifically which regulatory or legal ways independent retailer groups 

are impeded that might not apply to other organisational forms or structures.   There were 

25  responses  identifying  specific  aspects,  which  can  be  grouped  into  six  categories  as 

summarised in Table B10.  

Table B10.  Regulations and legal restrictions impeding independent retailer groups 

Regulatory and legal impediments facing retail members 

Restrictions Category 

Competition law preventing fixing prices 

Restrictions preventing consistent pricing 

Restrictions preventing standard pricing for own-brand products 

Competition law preventing consistent pricing and promotions across 
channels 
Competition law preventing joint marketing with standardised pricing 

Restrictions on national advertising campaigns and standard prices 

Restrictions preventing consistent prices and advertising 

Restrictions preventing joint advertising promotions at a single price point 

Restrictions preventing standardised pricing and advertising 

Regulations restricting standard pricing policy across the entire network and 
especially problematic with multi-channel sales 
Restricting on price preventing the operation of a joint online shop 

Consistent pricing 

Consistent pricing 

Consistent pricing 

Consistent pricing (+ advertising) 

Consistent pricing (+ advertising) 
Consistent pricing (+ advertising) 
Consistent pricing (+ advertising) 
Consistent pricing (+ advertising) 
Consistent pricing (+ advertising) 

Consistent pricing (+ online) 

Consistent pricing (+ online) 

Restrictions on opening hours 

Restrictions on opening hours compared to online 

Legal requirements preventing joint nationwide marketing activities 

Restrictions preventing consistent advertising 

Opening hours  

Opening hours 

Joint marketing 

Joint marketing 

Competition laws preventing independent retailers using the same 
commercial policies as integrated retailers 
Disadvantages arising from antitrust laws, fragmented buyer power and 
inefficiencies resulting from a multi-level business model 
Discriminatory regulations allowing  cooperatives but not independent retailer 
groups to offer a consistent and efficient common brand policy 
Restrictions on the contractual relationship between manufacturer and 
retailer 
Competition law preventing a joint online operation 

General commercial policy 

General commercial policy 

General commercial policy 

General commercial policy 

Online operations 

Competition law preventing retailer obligations to use centralised online sales  Online operations 

Competition law preventing retailer obligations to use centralised online sales  Online operations 

Discriminatory regulations preventing independent retailer groups being 
unable to produce a single unified online offer with coordinated logistics 
Discriminatory waste disposal regulations favouring online retailers 

Online operations 

Discriminatory regulations 

Online providers not subject to the same licensing and qualification criteria 

Discriminatory regulations 

Source: Analysis of responses to question Q2.9 

99 

 
 
Final Report 

Levelling the Playing Field 2.0 

The  largest  number  of  responses  summarised  in  Table  B10  were  about  restrictions  that 

prevent  independent  retailer  groups  using  consistent  or  standardised  prices  applicable  for 

the organisation as a whole, which was cited by 11 of the 25 responses, but particularly in 

respect of using consistent pricing in the context of advertising campaigns and promotions 

(6/11)  or  in  respect  of  online  retailing  (2/11).    The  other  restrictions  identified  by 

respondents  concerned  restrictions  on  opening  hours  (2),  joint  marketing  (2),  or  general 

commercial  policy  for  independent  retailer  groups  (4),  along  with  the  set  of  restrictions 

working together to inhibit the group developing internet operations (4), or regulations that 

face  physical  stores  but  can  be  avoided  by  online  retailers  so  work  in  a  discriminatory 

manner (2). 

Clearly,  the  legal  restrictions  relating  to  whether  consistent  pricing  can  be  used  by 

independent retailer groups is the aspect that most groups surveyed feel strongest about in 

terms  of  legal  impediments  inhibiting  their  ability  to  compete  effectively.    This  does  not 

necessarily  mean  that  groups  will  entirely  avoid  or  be  unable  to  use  consistent  prices  in 

specific instances, only that legal uncertainty overhangs the practice for independent retailer 

groups in a way that it does not for integrated retailer groups, which instead benefit from 

legal certainty  because of their ownership structure.  One respondent organisation (a ZGV 

member)  highlights  the  legal  uncertainty  issue  for  independent  retailer  groups  in  the 

following terms: 

“The  consumer  expects  a  clear  pricing  structure.  The  affiliated  companies  are  partially 
impeded by German and European competition law in having a joint external presence. 
This  concerns  in  particular  consistent  pricing,  for  instance  in  the  form  of  promotional 
measures  across  different  channels,  where  the  group’s  central  office  creates  brochures 
etc.  containing  specific  items  and  prices.  The  voluntary  participation  of  affiliated 
companies in such promotions naturally results in the same price being advertised for the 
same  product  in  the  context  of  such  centralised  advertising  activities.  This  is  currently 
something  of  a  grey  area  for  retail  groups.  Legal  clarification  regarding  the  legality  of 
such promotions would be helpful as a loss compensation measure compared to branch 
and franchise systems.” 

More  generally,  we  can  observe  from  Table  B10  that  it  is  often  a  combination  of  legal 

restrictions  and  specific  circumstances  or  needs  that  work  against  the  interests  of 

independent  retailer  groups.    In  providing  evidence  of  how  this  combination  works  in 

practice  and  what  it  means  for  the  extent  to  which  an  organisation  can  control  critical 

elements of decision making, one respondent providing a detailed diagram contrasting the 

extent  to  which  an  integrated  retailer  can  control  decision  making  compared  to  an 

100 

 
 
 
 
Final Report 

Levelling the Playing Field 2.0 

independent  retailer  group  even  if  it  has  strong  vertical  ties.    This  diagram  has  been 

anonymised and is shown in Figure B1, where for visual clarity a traffic light colouring system 

is used, ranging from bright green for “completely” through to deep red for “none” in terms 

of  the  extent  to  which  the  organisation  has  control  over  key  decisions,  with  intermediate 

degrees of “significantly”, “partly” and “slightly” shown respectively as muted green, yellow 

and  muted  red.    Here  the  contrast  between  the  greater  control  of  the  integrated  retailer 

(shown on the left hand side) is very clear compared to the considerably weaker control of 

the  independent  retailer  group  (shown  on  the  right  hand  side)  over  the  nine  separate 

decision aspects as well as overall ability to direct  retail trade  (shown in the bottom row).  

The diagram highlights the cumulative effect of where weak or limited control across several 

decisions  combines  together  to  undermine  overall  control  to  direct  retail  trade  and  leave 

independent retailer groups disadvantaged. 

Figure B1. Comparison of business models for integrated vs. independent retailer groups 

Retailer being single economic entity  Retailer group with independent retail members 

Chain 
selection  
(> 90 % of 
sales) 

Other 
products 
(< 10% of 
sales) 

TOTAL 
(100% of 
sales) 

Group 
selection 
(≥ 65 % of 
sales) 

Other 
products 
(≥ 25 % of 
sales) 

Retailers’ 
own sourcing 
(≥ 10 % of 
sales) 

TOTAL 
(100 % of 
sales) 

completely █ 

slightly █  significantly █ 

slightly █ 

none █ 

none █ 

partly █ 

completely █  significantly █  significantly █  significantly █ 

none █ 

none █ 

partly █ 

completely █ 

partly █  significantly █ 

slightly █ 

none █ 

none █ 

slightly █ 

completely █ 

partly █  significantly █  significantly █ 

none █ 

none █ 

partly █ 

completely █  completely █  completely █  significantly █ 

none █ 

none █ 

partly █ 

completely █  significantly █  significantly █ 

slightly █ 

slightly █ 

none █ 

slightly █ 

completely █  significantly █  significantly █ 

none █ 

none █ 

none █ 

none █ 

completely █  completely █  completely █ 

none █ 

none █ 

none █ 

none █ 

completely █  completely █  completely █ 

slightly █ 

none █ 

none █ 

slightly █ 

Central unit’s 
ability to 
decide 

decide range of 
goods 

decide general 
planograms 

special events 
and product 
placement 

retail price or 
maximum retail 
price 

campaigns 
(products, prices, 
advertising) 

place of purchase 
(where the store 
buys products) 

whether to allow 
suppliers’ 
representatives to 
visit in stores 

to exclude certain 
product(s) from 
range of goods in 
retail stores 

to what extend 
there a 
competing 
products (and 
their roles) in 

101 

 
 
 
Final Report 

retail stores 

Levelling the Playing Field 2.0 

Overall ability to 
direct retail trade  completely █  significantly █  significantly █ 

partly █ 

slightly █ 

none █ 

slightly █ 

Source: Anonymised diagram from a respondent’s submission in response to question Q2.9 

B4. Contractual agreements and arrangements 

B4.1 Types of contractual obligations on independent retailer members 

To  gather  information  on  the  types  of  contractual  obligations  applied  to  independent 

retailer  members,  respondents  were  given  a  list  of  19  different  possible  obligations  they 

might  use  with  their  retailer  members,  which  could  represent  either  horizontal  or  vertical 

agreements  depending  on  the  structure  and  nature  of  the  responding  organisation.    For 

each  of  the  19  possible  obligations,  respondents  were  asked  whether  their  organisation 

used the obligation and if so to what extent it was used in respect of its product coverage.  

Specifically,  respondents  were  asked  to  say  whether  the  usage  was  always,  sometimes  or 

never, and if used whether the product coverage was for all products or just some products.  

Additionally, the respondents were asked for the reason why an obligation was used, such as 

the intended benefits to the organisation, retailer members and final consumers.  In respect 

of  the  responses,  not  all  36  survey  respondents  provided  information  on  the  listed 

obligations  and  there  was  variation  in  the  number  of  responses  to  each  listed  obligation, 

ranging from 16/36 to 25/36, but in all but one case the response rate was over 50%.   The 

results are summarised in Table B11. 

As can be seen in Table B11, there is significant variation in terms of usage of the different 

possible  obligations.    The  most  extensively  used  relate  store  name  and  store  branding 

requirements,  promotion  and  advertising  requirements,  and  common  prices  for  price 

promotions, but even for these obligations there was a high proportion of respondents who 

did  not  use  these  obligations.      In  contrast,  the  respondent  organisations  did  not  impose 

fixed prices on retailer members (with one exception from a respondent allowed to do this 

in  the  very  specific  context  of  regulated  tobacco  prices),  but  other  price  restrictions  were 

also hardly used, notably in setting minimum retail prices but also even in setting maximum 

retail  prices  or  suggested  price  ranges.    In  addition,  other  kinds  of  restraints  on  members 

were  not  extensively  used 

including  exclusive  or  minimum  proportion  purchasing 

obligations, full-line forcing, exclusive territories, selective distribution, and requirements to 

use  certain  central  services  like  training  and  service  providers.    Also,  in  regard  to  internet 

sales, respondents indicated that they mostly did not use non-compete obligations to favour 

102 

 
 
 
Final Report 

Levelling the Playing Field 2.0 

centralised  internet  sales  and  nor  did  they  extensively  use  obligations  for  common  prices 

with internet retailing.  The  lack of use  and coverage  of these  potential obligations comes 

despite the  significant  benefits  that  could be  available,  as identified by those  groups  using 

the obligations and seeing benefits for their group, members and consumers, with examples 

listed in the last column. 

Table B11.  Regulations and legal restrictions impeding independent retailer groups 

Retail member obligations 

Usage  

Always  Some-
times 

Never 

Coverage  
Some 
All 

Reasons for use 

Exclusive purchasing 

(25/36 = 69% response rate) 
Minimum proportion 
purchasing 
(24/36 = 67% response rate) 
Exclusive territories 

(21/36 = 58% response rate) 
Selective distribution 

(21/36 = 58% response rate) 
Fixed retail prices 

(20/36 = 56% response rate) 
Minimum retail prices 

(22/36 = 61% response rate) 
Maximum retail prices 

(22/36 = 61% response rate) 
Prices set within suggested 
range 
(19/36 = 53% response rate) 
Common prices for price 
promotions  
(21/36 = 56% response rate) 
Common prices for Internet 
retailing 
(22/36 = 61% response rate) 
Promotion and advertising 
requirements 
(19/36 = 53% response rate) 
Non-compete with centralised 
Internet sales 
(16/36 = 44% response rate) 
Required purchasing of set 
product lines 
(21/36 = 58% response rate) 
Full-line forcing (i.e. have to sell 
all products) 
(21/36 = 58% response rate) 
Use specified logistics provider 

(21/36 = 58% response rate) 
Use specified store service 
provider 
(21/36 = 58% response rate) 

1 

2 

3 

2 

0 

0 

2 

1 

5 

3 

6 

1 

3 

0 

4 

2 

8 

16 

11 

11 

2 

6 

1 

3 

3 

5 

6 

2 

6 

1 

8 

2 

3 

6 

16 

13 

19 

19 

17 

13 

12 

17 

7 

14 

10 

19 

14 

15 

0 

3 

3 

2 

0 

0 

2 

1 

1 

1 

3 

1 

1 

0 

2 

0 

103 

8 

6 

1 

5 

1 

1 

1 

3 

7 

1 

3 

1 

5 

1 

1 

1 

 Strengthen buying position 
 Network efficiencies 
 Supporting own brands 
 Strengthen buying position 
 Purchasing efficiency 
 Logistical efficiency 
 Encourage retailer investment 
 Site protection 
 Partial franchise system 
 Support supplier demands 
 Support brand image 
 Retailer investments in service 

 Tobacco tax law 

 Supporting common brands 
 Retailer investments in service 
 Own brand image consistency 
 Facilitate promotion campaigns 
 Own brand development 
 Consistency of retail offer 

 Commercial policy 
 Recommended prices 

 Support competitiveness 
 Support national advertising 
 Holding down prices with max RPM 
 Commercial policy 
 Hold down prices with max RPM 
 Legislative demands 
 Supporting international campaigns 
 Consistency for consumers 
 Store and brand image 
 Distribution economies of scale 
 Service and technology investment 
 Common platform establishment 
 Enhance negotiating power 
 Consistency for consumers 
 Product availability to consumers 

 Enhance negotiating power 
 Consistency for consumers 

 Network and logistical efficiencies 
 Supply assurance 

 Consistency in service quality 
 Network efficiencies and cost savings 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Final Report 

Levelling the Playing Field 2.0 

Use specified staff training 

(24/36 = 67% response rate) 
Store name and store branding 
requirements 
(21/36 = 58% response rate) 
Store layout and planogram 
requirements 
(25/36 = 69% response rate) 

3 

9 

3 

8 

4 

9 

13 

8 

13 

3 

8 

2 

1 

2 

2 

 Service quality 
 Food safety and hygiene 
 Common identity and branding 
 Common branding and image 
 Supporting retail brand identity 
 Consistency for consumer benefits 
 Store image and consistency 
 Common brand identity 
 Network efficiencies 

Source: Analysis of responses to question Q3.1 

In  addition  to  the  19  listed  potential  obligations,  a  few  respondents  mentioned  other 

obligations applied to their retail members for the sake of ensuring efficiency, promoting a 

common  brand  image  and  ensuring  a  consistent  mode  of  operation.    The  additional 

obligations  cited 

include  making  retail  price  recommendations  rather  than  formal 

requirements  on  price  setting  as  well  as  obligations  to  accept  purchasing  terms  and 

conditions, follow charter and membership agreements, comply with store lease and store 

policy terms, and adopt central settlement (over invoices) when required. 

From the set of responses, it was not clear on the extent to which the  listed restrictions in 

Table B11 were treated as formal obligations as opposed to expectations, or how indeed any 

obligations would be enforced.  Indeed, some respondents specially indicated the use of the 

term  “recommended”,  indicating  that  retailer members may  have  had  greater freedom or 

flexibility than a hard-and-fast  obligation enforced by contract.  This recommended aspect 

was predominantly indicated by respondents in respect of pricing or promotional aspects. 

B4.2 Extent to which obligations are necessary for efficient business conduct 

To  ascertain  the  extent  to  which  independent  retailer  groups  feel  that  obligations  on 

members  are  essential  to  the  efficiency  and  competitiveness  of  their  organisations, 

respondents were asked to what extent are the obligations used necessary for the sake of 

conducting business on an efficient basis and whether are there less restrictive alternative 

available (Q3.2).   There were 19 responses which provided clear indication as to the extent 

to  which  obligations  on  retail  members  might  be  necessary  or  desirable  for  the  sake  of 

business efficiency.   These responses are summarised in Table B12 according to the type of 

organisation,  where  almost  half  (9/19)  were  from  independent  retailer  groups,  and  the 

remainder  comprising  three  each  from  retailers’  cooperatives  and  voluntary  membership 

groups,  and  one  each  from  a  group  of  professionals,  a  trade  association,  a  manufacturer 

cooperative and a wholesale cooperative.  

104 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Final Report 

Levelling the Playing Field 2.0 

The responses summarised in Table B12 highlight the essential nature for obligations to help 

the  group  continue  to  operate  and  its  members  survive  in  the  market,  but  in  particular 

responses stress the importance of supporting the group’s brand concept, public image and 

overall commercial policy, as well as specifically the benefits flowing from strengthening the 

group’s  negotiating  position  with  suppliers  and  supporting  marketing  and  promotional 

effort.  

Table B12.  Necessity of obligations for efficient business conduct 

Business necessity of retail member obligations 

Organisation type 

Retailers taking part in national campaigns must abide by the specified maximum prices 
for consistency 
Necessary for an umbrella brand concept 

Needed as a minimum to run a national retail group with a common image and 
commercial policy for the consumer's benefit 
Needed for consistent brand image and planning security for total purchases 

Extremely important for the retail stage, since this stage could end up disappearing in 
the long run otherwise 
Participating in central settlement is essential for funding the central office with surplus 
distributed directly to members, with affiliated retailers benefiting from better 
purchasing terms and reduced workload 
Obligations are partially necessary in in order to achieve price benefits from suppliers 
and service providers based on guaranteed purchase volumes 
The current contractual obligations are crucial for the group's business operations 

Chain selections are indispensable to maximum retail price maintenance, improving 
purchasing terms, and better operative efficiency 
Practically no obligations are imposed 

Central settlement conditions ensure efficient business operations but the majority of 
services offered are not mandatory 
Needed to advertise standard pricing to support marketing efforts 

In order to enable our (mainly small) retailers to survive in the market 

Obligations when legally permitted can help support a positive public image 

There is no alternative to a liberalisation of the competition law framework in order to 
be able to compete against integrated retail chains. 
Members have relatively few obligations and the central body provides effective sales 
and marketing measures as support 
Justified by economic rationale to reduce costs, increase negotiating power, and 
establish common branding 
Needed for a strong negotiating position and public image 

Staff training obligations are required for meeting trading requirements 

Source: Analysis of responses to question Q3.2 

Retailer group 

Retailer group 

Retailer group 

Retailer group 

Retailer group 

Retailer group 

Retailer group 

Retailer group 

Retailer group 

Retailers' 
cooperative 
Retailers' 
cooperative 
Retailers' 
cooperative 
Voluntary 
membership group 
Voluntary 
membership group 
Voluntary 
membership group 
Group of 
professionals 
Trade association 

Manufacturer 
cooperative 
Wholesale 
cooperative 

105 

 
 
 
 
Final Report 

Levelling the Playing Field 2.0 

One respondent (a trade association) summarises the use the objective justification for the 

use  of  these  obligations  as  necessary  to  constitute  a  group  pooling  resources  rather  just 

individual operators in competing with integrated retailers in the following terms: 

“All  of  the  obligations  mentioned  above  can  be  justified  objectively  –  there  is  an 
economic rationale connected to a common business policy, a common brand policy and 
a  common  goal  of  pooling  resources  in  order  to  reduce  costs  or  increase  negotiating 
power.  This  is  the  very  nature  of  a  distribution  network  made  up  of  independent 
operators. 

In the case of a distribution network structured as a group of independents, the group is 
a  resource-sharing  entity  pooling  purchases  and  services.  The  independent  members 
sharing  control  of  this  group  put  together  a  business  policy  which  may  result  in  a 
common brand concept. A distribution network  set  up by  independents is thus granted 
the same means of action as any integrated network.” 

However, it is clear from the detailed responses provided that it is the set or combination of 

obligations used rather than just individual obligations which is vital to the efficiency of the 

organisation.  In demonstrating how the intertwined nature of obligations on retail members 

work  in  tandem,  one  retail  group  seeking  to  use  vertical  influence  for  the  benefit  of  the 

organisation  as  a  whole  to  be  as  efficient  and  competitive  as  possible,  so  benefitting 

consumers as well, argues how centrally determined assortment selections as a purchasing 

obligation works together with maximum retail prices (as price caps) in the following terms 

(in anonymised form):41  

“The  group  has  in  its  self-assessments  concluded  that  assortment  selections  are 
indispensable  to  (maximum)  retail  price  maintenance  and  better  operative  efficiency. 
Assortment selections enable the group to have better purchasing terms with suppliers. 
Assortment  selections  create  also  a  solid  base  for  efficient  product  management  and 
logistics. These are obvious sources of cost efficiencies.  Furthermore, (maximum) retail 
price maintenance is necessary to pass on these benefits (in form of lower prices) to the 
consumers.  Based  on  our  own  assessment,  recommended  product  ranges  and/or 
recommended  retail  prices  have  not  led  to  as  positive  results  as  with  assortment 
selections and (maximum) retail price maintenance. 

Having said that, the group’s buying power is substantially undermined by several facts. 
First,  retailers  do  not  have  any  definitive  obligation  to  buy  goods  from  through  the 
central organisation. While the group may exploit is buyer power regarding assortment 

41 This  same retail group also  separately provided details of empirical analysis they had undertaken 
which  corroborates  their  arguments  here.    Their  analysis  shows  that  a  high  share  of  mandatory 
assortment is correlated with a low total price level for a store and that products with maximum retail 
price  (MRP)  set  by  the  central  organisation  were  significantly  cheaper  than  products  without  with 
MRP  so  acting  as  a  driver  for  competitiveness.    The  analysis  also  showed  that  high  usage  of 
recommended retail prices (RRP) correlates with local total prices level of a store as the stores strive 
for efficiency. 

106 

 
 
 
                                                      
Final Report 

Levelling the Playing Field 2.0 

selection to some extent, retailers may contact suppliers directly and even use competing 
sources  of  supplies  when  purchasing  goods  belonging  to  assortment  selections. 
Furthermore,  retailers  may  always  purchase  and  sell  other  goods  that  are  not  in 
assortment selections. This diminishes the group’s bargaining power resulting in weaker 
purchasing  terms  and,  consequently,  consumer  benefits.  At  the  same  time,  the  group’s 
main  competitors  may  fully  exploit  their  bargaining  power  in  sourcing.  Therefore,  it 
would be important to the group to be able to (i) impose exclusive purchasing obligation 
on its retailers. 

Furthermore, the group’s right to set maximum prices are limited compared to its main 
competitors... Maximum priced selections cover approximately 65% of sales in each retail 
chain. Retailers may set prices quite freely on the rest of the selections. Even if the group 
has  given  price  recommendations  to  its  retailers,  retailers  can  then  exceed  these 
recommendations. This, on the other hand, damages  the group’s price image and leads 
to  worse  purchasing  terms.  Suppliers  do  not  give  best  terms  to  the  group  if  the  group 
cannot assure its suppliers that such benefits shall be passed on to the final consumers.  
Finally,  the  group’s  main  competitors  are  free  to  set  retail  prices  as  they  see  fit. 
Therefore, it would important to the group to be able to (ii) set maximum retail prices on 
all  products  that  are  being  sold  from  the  group’s  retailer  stores;  or  (iii)  at  least  create 
positive  incentive  schemes  to  its  retailers  not  to  beyond  price  level  the  centre  has 
recommended.” 

B4.3 Services and terms of trade not offered to members 

In  addition  to  responses  to  questions  Q3.1  and  Q3.2  providing  information  about  which 

obligations organisations use  in respect  of their  retailer members and the extent  to which 

these  are  necessary  for  efficiency  and  competitiveness  purposes,  respondents  were  also 

asked about the services and terms of trade that their organisations are unable to provide to 

their  independent  retailer  members  because  of  the  organisation’s  structure  and  remit 

and/or  legal  impediments  and  regulations.  Some  14  organisations  responded with  specific 

information on the services and trade that they could not offer members but would like to 

be in a position to do so if regulations and competition law permitted them to do so and also 

if  members  were  willing  to  accept  their  use.    The  information  from  the  responses  by  the 

type of organisation responding is summarised in Table B13, where restrictions on the ability 

to  undertaking  joint  advertising,  consistent  pricing  and  online  retailing  again  come  to  the 

fore.  

Table B13.  Services and terms of trade that cannot be offered to members 

Services and terms of trade not currently available to retailer members 

Organisation type 

No common e-commerce platform providing a common assortment with the same 
prices 
No online retail 

Retailer group 

Retailer group 

107 

 
 
 
 
Final Report 

Levelling the Playing Field 2.0 

Restricted online development requiring high investment effort with high risks 

No unified payment and financial services 

Retailer group 

Retailer group 

No joint sale promotions, no key product data with sale price, and no margin advice 

Retailer group 

No joint advertising due to inconsistency in brand images and variations in product 
range, no consistent advertising, and no central merchandising management 
No nationwide marketing activities 

Retailer group 

Retailer group 

No joint advertising with standardised pricing 

Restricted development of own brands and exclusive products and no proactive 
pricing policy 
National restrictions (e.g. market power regulations in the Czech Republic) 

No price fixing or use of minimum resale price maintenance 

No common prices 

No recommended pricing and joint price advertising (e.g. special offers) 

Source: Analysis of responses to question Q3.3 

Retailers' cooperative 

Retailers' cooperative 

Service intermediary 

Trade association 

Voluntary 
membership group 
Group of 
professionals 

B4.4 Additional costs incurred by members if not part of the group 

In  respect  of  the  benefits  that  go  with  membership  of  independent  retailer  groups, 

respondent  were  asked  about  how  independent  retailer  members  would  fare,  and 

specifically  what  additional  costs  and  they  would  face,  on  what  scale,  if  they  were  not 

members  of  the  organisation  (Q3.4).    Some  22  respondents  addressed  this  question, 

summarised in Table B14 according to the organisational type, with the table split between 

those  providing  general  detail  shown  in  the  top  part  of  the  table  and  those  giving  more 

specific  attributable  figures  on  the  extent  or  impact  of  additional  costs  or  lost  benefits 

shown in the bottom part of the table. 

Table B14.  Services and terms of trade not offered by independent retailer groups 

Additional costs incurred if not members in group 

Organisation type 

I. General losses and implications 

Additional warehousing costs, reduced product range and additional 
administration costs 
Higher fixed costs for negotiating 

Higher process-related costs 

Higher purchase prices 

Higher purchase prices and inefficient logistics 

Voluntary membership 
group 
Wholesale cooperative 

Service intermediary 

Retailer group 

Retailer group 

Higher purchase prices and lower economies of scale 

Retailers’ cooperative 

Higher purchase prices, higher negotiating costs and higher marketing costs  Group of professionals 

Higher purchasing costs and loss of economies of scale 

Loss of competitive sourcing, logistics and IT support 

Loss of efficiency in developing online presence, negotiating with suppliers, 
and loss of central invoicing 
Unable to survive 

Retailer group 

Retailer group 

Retailer group 

Trade association 

108 

 
 
 
Final Report 

Unable to survive 

Unable to survive with drop in margins resulting in running a loss-making 
business 

II. Quantified loses and implications 

Additional 1-5% 

Additional 3% 

Levelling the Playing Field 2.0 

Voluntary membership 
group 
Retailer group 

Voluntary membership 
group 
Retailers’ cooperative 

Approximately €100,000 per member per year 

Extra 2-15% purchasing costs, extra 20% marketing costs and extra 2-5% 
financing costs 
Higher purchase prices, advertising costs and IT services resulting in 20% 
additional costs 
Impossible to compete effectively with 10% higher costs 

Retailer group 

Retailer group 

Retailer group 

Retailer group 

Loss of 4% bonuses from group buying and higher operating and financing 
costs 
Loss of benefits amounting to 5-7% of realised turnover 

Voluntary membership 
group 
Retailer group 

95% would be unable to survive due to their small size 

Retailer group 

Source: Analysis of responses to question Q3.4 

The set of 13 responses in the top part of the table identify a wide range of additional costs 

that independent  retailers would incur in the absence  of membership to the organisation, 

including  higher  fixed  costs  of  negotiation,  higher  purchase  prices,  inefficient  logistics, 

additional  warehousing  costs,  reduced  product  range,  lower  economies  of  scale,  higher 

marketing costs, additional administration costs, loss of central invoicing, loss of efficiency in 

developing  an  online  presence.    Three  of  these  respondents  conclude  bluntly  that  these 

members  would  be  unable  to  survive  outside  the  organisation  in  the  absence  of  any 

equivalent organisation for independent retailer groups. 

In addition,  respondents were  also asked to  indicate  the percentage increase in costs  that 

independent retailer members would typically face if they stopped being members of their 

organisation for given alternatives.  A number of respondents said that they were unable to 

quantify the percentage or monetary amount facing individual members, in part because of 

differences in retailer sizes and circumstances they face, but mostly because it was not clear 

that there was a ready alternative.  However, 9 respondents did provide figures, as shown in 

the bottom part of Table B14.  The percentage increases in costs range from an additional 

1%  to  an  extra  20%,  with  the  lower  values  tending  to  be  for  overall  costs  and  the  higher 

values  for specific  service costs.   Also, beyond percentage levels, one  independent retailer 

group (involved in automotive retailing) put a value (at approximately €100,000 per member 

per year) on the loss for not being a member of the group. 

109 

 
 
 
 
Final Report 

Levelling the Playing Field 2.0 

Taken across the set of respondents, it is evident that many retailer groups feel that retail 

members  would  struggle  to  survive  and  prosper  if  they  were  outside  of  the  organisation 

given  the  benefits  and  protection  that  group  membership  can  afford  and  the  lack  of 

alternatives in view of the considerable efficiencies and market advantages that integrated 

retailers and franchise systems hold in most retail markets. 

B4.5 Reasons why members wish to remain independent 

In addition to asking about the consequences for members losing their membership and not 

being part of the organisation, respondents were also asked why their independent retailer 

members  wish  to  remain  as  independent  and  not  instead  be  part  of  an  integrated  retail 

organisation or franchise organisation (Q3.5).  The 27 responses to this question are listed 

(alphabetically) in Table B15.  The key aspects that most organisations point to is that their 

members want to retain their independence because this way they are entrepreneurs rather 

than employees or store managers, they have greater say in decision making as co-owners of 

the organisation, it meets their needs for being self-sufficient and having business freedom 

and  able  to  express  their  individuality,  it  provides  continuity  as  a  family  business  and 

supporting tradition, and serves them in wanting to remain independent but also benefiting 

from cost savings and business  support within a membership organisation, with ultimately 

control  of  their  lives  and  reward  for  their  own  efforts  while  bearing  the  financial  risk  of 

owning and running an independent business. 

Table B15.  Reasons for why group members wish to retain their independence 

Reasons cited for members wishing to remain as independent 

As entrepreneurs owning their own stores and with internal pressures ensuring group 
competitiveness 
Being an entrepreneur not employee or store manager 

Continuity as family-run businesses rooted in their locality 

Control of their lives and reward for their own efforts 

Co-owners making joint decisions providing power beyond own retail outlet 

Desire to be completely independent and self-sufficient 

Ensuring individuality and diversity of services 

Entrepreneurial freedom steering their businesses independently 

Entrepreneurs and companies grown over generations appreciate independence and 
decision-making freedom with established strong brands in their respective region 
Entrepreneurs and family-run companies bearing financial risk but with maximum 
influence on their business 
Family-run business put their heart and soul into their companies 

110 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Final Report 

Levelling the Playing Field 2.0 

Free and independent entrepreneurs established over generations in their local market 

Freedom of entrepreneurship rather than being an employee 

Freedom of independent entrepreneur to act and make decisions 

High levels of freedom within an organisation structure 

Independence supporting tradition  

Independence, self-rule, entrepreneurial freedom, free to choose central services 
provided, and no restrict requirements or documentation obligations 
Independent decision-making to autonomously further their business development 

Independent decision-making, investments and risk involvement with better local and 
customer knowledge and more personalised product range 
Independent entrepreneurship 

Maintaining independence 

Maximum entrepreneurial independence 

Nothing better than freedom 

Supporting an independent mind-set making their own decisions 

Want to be independent but franchising could offer advantages 

Want to remain business owners 

Want to remain legally independent and act autonomously while achieving cost savings 
and process support 

Source: Analysis of responses to question Q3.5 

B4.6 Advantages of other retailer organisational structures 

Given  the  contractual  restrictions,  regulations  and  other  limitations  that  independent 

retailer groups face, respondents were asked what specific advantages do integrated firms, 

franchise  system  or  other  retail  organisational  structures  have  that  their  members  do  not 

have and why do these arise.  Twenty four respondents provided details on 61 advantages 

(i.e. an average of a little over 2.5 examples per respondent) arising from nature, structure 

and/or ownership pattern of these alternative retail organisational types.  These advantages 

are categorised and listed in Table B16 in rank order according to the number of examples 

cited for each of the 12 categories used.   

Table B16.  Advantages of other retailer organisational structures 

Category 

Frequency 

Identified advantage for integrated retailers and other organisations forms 

Promotion 

14 

Brand image 

13 

Pricing 

9 

Ability to undertake nationwide promotions (x 2); Active, aggressive and nationwide 
communication; Advertising economies of scale; Consistent advertising; Consistent 
customer communication; Consistent marketing across all channels; Fewer 
restrictions on marketing Joint advertising (x 2); Promotional economies of scale; 
Standardised advertising (x 2); Uniform marketing behaviour 
Clear image to consumers; Consistent appearance; Consistent approach and 
communication; Consistent brand image of shops/products/staff; Consistent brand 
policy; Consistent image to consumers; Higher consumer recognition; Same name 
and corporate identity; Strong consumer brands; Strong retail brands; Uniform brand 
image with standard prices; Uniform brand image with standard prices and special 
offers; Uniform public image 
Consistent pricing (x 2); Consistent retail prices; Franchising systems also unable to 

111 

 
 
 
 
Final Report 

Levelling the Playing Field 2.0 

set standardised prices in the manner of integrated retailers; Freedom to set same 
prices; Pricing policy control; Standard pricing structure; Standardised pricing; 
Standardised pricing and service offer 
Absence of intra-brand competition; Efficiencies from integrated business model; 
More simplified management and policy decision making; Quicker decision-making 
without need for agreeing decisions with a large number of players; Seamless 
communication within organisation; Standardised purchase processes; Systematic 
training of staff; Uniform management system 
Better discounts from suppliers; Better negotiating position; Better purchasing 
conditions through bulk purchasing; Consolidated rather than fragmented buyer 
power; Possibility to negotiate with suppliers based on guaranteed assortment in all 
stores 
Ability to delist products in absence of favourable terms; Consistent product 
range/portfolio; Strict policy in terms of product range and sales/distribution 
Credit and investment advantages; Investment power 
Lower logistic costs; Purchasing economies of scale 

Absence of antitrust law restrictions inhibiting efficiency 
Market power 
Lower overhead expenses; additional synergies 
None 

Internal 
integration 

Negotiating 
power 

Product 
control 
Financing 
Supply 
efficiencies 
Legal freedom 
Market power 
Overheads 
None 

8 

5 

3 

2 
2 

1 
1 
1 
1 

Source: Analysis of responses to question Q3.6 

As  shown  in  Table  B16,  there  was  one  instance  where  a  respondent  stated  “none”  to 

indicate  that  these  other  organisations  forms  had  no  apparent  advantages  over  its  own 

group.    In  all  other  cases,  though,  the  respondents  identified  an  array  of  different 

advantages  available  to  integrated  retailers  and  franchise  systems,  especially  in  respect  of 

promotion,  brand  image,  pricing,  internal  integration,  negotiating  power,  and  product 

control, along with instances related to financing, supply efficiencies, legal freedom, market 

power, and overhead cost savings and cost synergies. 

As  discussed  above,  often  effects  can  work  in  tandem,  and  this  certainly  seems  to  be  the 

case  with  the  benefits  enjoyed  by  integrated  retailers  over  independent  retailer  groups 

when  the  lack  of  the  ability  to  control  all  business  aspects  puts  these  groups  at  a 

disadvantage.  For example, the lack of control of independent retailer members can provide 

a means for powerful suppliers to exploit this lack of control to their advantage in a way that 

is  not  possible  with  integrated  retailers.    To  illustrate  how  this  works  in  relation  to  the 

greater  negotiating  power  of  an  integrated  retailer,  one  large  independent  retailer  group 

operating  with  different  retail  chains  contrasted  its  vulnerable  negotiating  position  and 

inability to control costs as effectively as it would like in the following terms (in anonymised 

form): 

“One of the key advantages is a generally better negotiating position when it comes to 
purchasing. Although our group can achieve significant economies of scale thanks to its 
purchasing volume, integrated organisations are able to, for instance, simply discontinue 
certain  products  from  suppliers  if  no  agreement  can  be  reached.  Because  of  its 

112 

 
 
 
 
Final Report 

Levelling the Playing Field 2.0 

cooperative  philosophy,  our  group  is  under  obligation  to  procure  the  items  considered 
necessary  by  its  members,  even  if  this  means purchasing  them  at  less  favourable  costs 
than the competition might be able to achieve. Due to the sheer number of independent 
retailers, there is a significant number of retailers who wish to stock certain items, some 
of which may even be at  the disposal of the buyers themselves. This  results in  retailers 
being able to influence purchasing organisations via their cooperatives. Suppliers can use 
this  effect  to  their  advantage  by  actively  promoting  their  products  with  the  retailers, 
putting pressure on the purchasing organisations.  

The aforementioned integrated organisations are also able to run a leaner operation and 
generate efficiencies – although perhaps to the detriment of variety – thanks to stricter 
regulations in terms of shop furnishings, distribution and advertising of products.” 

B5. National policy issues 

The questionnaire asked respondents a series of questions about how policies, regulations 

and laws are impacting their organisations and membership, in respect of the ways in which 

they might be impeded, restricted or discriminated against, and also what the organisations 

would want to see changed in order to improve their situation in aiding their efficiency and 

competitiveness.   This section details the responses in regard of local, federal and national 

policy matters, while Section 6 below covers EU-wide policy issues. 

B5.1 Impact of national or federal competition policy and regulations 

As  an  opening  question  on  policy  matters,  the  respondents  were  asked 

in  what 

demonstrable ways does national or federal/regional competition policy impact or  impede 

their organisation and their independent retailer members (Q4.1).  In total, 24 respondents 

provided defined answers, of which four respondents said there was no specific impact, but 

the  other  twenty  respondents  gave  a  total  of  32  examples,  which  for  convenience  are 

organised  into  general  categories  and  listed  by  their  rank  order  of  the  frequency  for  the 

category and summarised in Table B17.    

Table B17.  Impediments due to national/regional regulations and competition policy  

Category 

Bureaucracy 

7 

Number  Impact and impediments from national/regional regulations and policy 

Administration burden and costs arising if food inspections and wastage control 
systems are introduced; Administrative burden for completing statistics reports 
and documentation; Bureaucracy and administration burden associated with 
following labour laws; Bureaucracy and compliance driving up costs; Bureaucracy 
and intrusion from price control authorities; Disproportionate bureaucracy and 
strain on independent retailers; National-level bureaucracy exacerbated by 
European regulation 
Competition authority views planning policy restrictions as creating barriers to 
competition in retail trade; Planning and construction laws inhibiting the 
development of new stores; Planning policy and over-supply of retail space 
resulting in desolation of city centres; Planning policy for stores; Varying local 

113 

Planning policy 

5 

 
 
 
 
Final Report 

Levelling the Playing Field 2.0 

Opening hours 

Vertical restraints 

Transport policy 

Advertising ban 

Below cost selling 

Public procurement 

Energy levy 

Cooperatives 

Market definition 

Pricing promotion 

Collaboration 

Tax policy 

Wage legislation 

4 

4 

2 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

regulations 

Loss of turnover due to restricted Sunday opening hours; Opening hour 
restrictions (x 2); Opening hour restrictions but not applicable 
Competition authority refuses to accept any exclusive purchasing obligations on 
independent retailers and doubtful on maximum retail price maintenance; 
Competition authority requirements to adjust pricing services provided to 
individual retailers; Controversial draft bills ultimately not adopted due to 
different distribution models not sufficiently taken into consideration; 
Competition authority encouragement to adopt voluntary governance 
mechanisms to tackle unfair trading practices 
Traffic and parking management affecting trade; Transportation policy restricting 
sales force operations 
Tobacco advertising ban restricting retailer's communication with the consumer 

Abolition of the ban on selling at cost price would be desirable, since it has not 
worked in practice 
Competitive tendering requirements favouring large specialised companies 

Renewable energy levy driving up retailer costs 

Inconsistent legal treatment of cooperatives in being able to set common sale 
prices in some countries but not others 
Competition authority views dominant position at 30%+ national market share 

Prohibition on joint advertising with standard pricing 

Small retailers prevented from acting together 

Large corporations such as Amazon do not pay trade taxes but use the 
infrastructure paid for by the tax payers 
Minimum wage legislation 

Source: Analysis of responses to question Q4.1 

As  the  table  shows,  the  most  frequency  cited  examples  related  to  bureaucracy  and  the 

associated administrative burden, planning policy (in respect of opening new stores and the 

regulation of stores and retail centres), opening hours (which appear particularly restrictive 

in  some  EU  member  states),  and  policy  towards  vertical  restraints  and  distribution 

agreements (including restrictions on exclusive purchasing obligations and the use of resale 

price  maintenance  as  well  as  policy  towards  unfair  trading  practices).    In  addition,  there 

were individual examples from a string of other categories as diverse as traffic and parking 

policy, tobacco advertising ban, below cost selling law, competitive tendering requirements, 

renewable energy levy, inconsistent legal treatment of cooperatives, market definition and 

the  treatment  of  a  dominant  position  if  holding  above  30%  market  share,  prohibition  on 

joint  advertising  for  price  promotions,  small  retailers  being  prevented  from  collaborating, 

discriminatory  tax  policy  (being  advantageous  to  pure  online  retailing  organisations),  and 

minimum wage legislation. 

B5.2 National decisions relevant to retailing sectors 

Building  on  this  general  information,  respondents  were  asked  a  more  specific  question  in 

respect  of  whether  they  have  there  been  any  national  decisions  (directly  or  indirectly) 

114 

 
 
 
 
 
Final Report 

Levelling the Playing Field 2.0 

relevant  to  the  retailing  sector  served  by  their  members  in  respect  of  market  definition, 

permitted/prohibited practices, and/or mergers that are influencing the business  practices 

and contractual arrangements for their organisation and membership (Q4.2).   Of the twenty 

respondents, nine said there were none.  From the eleven other respondents, they identified 

15 specific decisions which have been summarised in category ranks in Table B18.   

The  list  of  specific  decisions  covered  in  Table  B18  includes  national  competition  authority 

decisions based on investigations, notably regarding vertical restraints and market definition 

issues,  including  matters  relating  to  exclusive  purchasing  obligations,  (maximum)  resale 

price  maintenance,  and  defining  dominant  positions  with  30%  national  share  as  well  as 

policy  on  delineating  local  retail  markets.    In  addition,  the  list  includes  specific  court 

decisions  which  relate  to  the  legal  treatment  of  cooperatives  and  over  geographic 

restrictions on pharmacy licenses.  There are also cited examples where no action was taken 

by  the  authorities,  including  in  respect  of  below-cost  selling  and  price  dumping,  removing 

import  restrictions,  and  no  planning  restrictions  on  logistics  centres  for  online  retailers 

(unlike the tight planning restrictions on retail stores). 

Table B18.  National decisions relevant to retail sectors 

Category 
Vertical restraints 

Number 
4 

Specific decisions relevant to retail sectors covered 

  Competition authority decision not to accept any exclusive purchasing 

obligations on independent retailers and doubtful on maximum retail price 
maintenance 

  Requirement for not conducting joint concerted marketing activities with 

consistent pricing 

  Restrictions on marketing and price controls 
  Competition authority investigation advising brand suppliers not to ban sales 

via online platforms 

Market definition 

3 

  Competition authority determining market definition at the local level 
  Competition authority adopting unduly narrow product and geographical 

market definitions 

  Competition authority decision that dominant position exists with 30% national 

market share 

Cooperatives 

3 

  The European Court of Justice’s ruling on Paint Graphos (8/9/2011,  C78/08 to 

C80/08) 

  European Parliament resolution on Social Economy (19/2/2009, no. 2008/2250, 

para 4). 

  French Public Notice (no. 10-A-26, 7/12/2010) regarding membership contracts 
for independent shops and the conditions for purchasing commercial property 
in the food distribution sector 

  Planning decisions allowing construction of logistics centres for online retailers 
  Confirmed legality of geographical restrictions on setting up pharmacies (ECJ 

joined cases C-159/12 to C-161/12 Venturini e. a. / ASL Varese e. a.) 

  Tobacco advertising ban and restrictions 

  Authority failure to prevent below-cost selling and price dumping 

  Abolition of import restrictions from the Far East 

Planning/licensing 
restrictions 

Advertising ban 

Dumping 

Imports 

2 

1 

1 

1 

Source: Analysis of responses to question Q4.2 

115 

 
 
 
 
Final Report 

Levelling the Playing Field 2.0 

B5.3 Aspects of current policy giving cause for concern 

In  addition  to  asking  about  decisions  relating  to  retail  sectors,  the  respondents  were  also 

asked  about  what  aspects  of current  national competition  authority  policy  are  giving  their 

organisation and membership most concern (Q4.3).  Four respondents answered that there 

were none, but other respondents identified 17 aspects of concern to their organisation and 

membership.  The 17 aspects are categorised and  as summarised by their category rank in 

Table B19.  The majority of these relate to concerns about vertical restraints policy and the 

legal uncertainty as to practices that may or may not be  allowed, particularly in respect of 

resale price maintenance, selective distribution, and the perception that manufacturers are 

favoured  over  retailers  in  applications  of  the  vertical  agreements  block  exemption 

regulation.  In addition, concerns were also raised about national authorities doing nothing 

about unfair competition from large online providers, especially when paying little or no tax.  

Further aspects cited were about state interference in business decision making and also a 

specific  case  about  competitive  tendering  requirements  in  regulated  markets  for  medical 

goods.    Furthermore,  concern  about  legal  uncertainty  was  also  raised  in  respect  to  how 

competition  authorities  would  physical  store  retailers  cooperating  over  developing  online 

sales.  

Table B19.  Aspects of national policy giving independent retailer groups most concern  

Category 
Vertical restraints 

Number 
9 

Unfair competition 

4 

Regulation 

Market definition 

Environment policy 

2 

1 

1 

Aspects of national policy giving concern 

  Attitude against maximum retail price maintenance 
  Block exemption regulation favouring manufacturers over retailers 
  Brand providers allowed to impede online distribution of their products 
  Legal uncertainty over vertical price fixing requiring new guidelines 
  Regulations restricting selective distribution (x 3) 
  Requirements to remove any obstacles to inter-brand mobility 
  Restrictive practices 
  Continuing to allow tax benefits for foreign online providers 
  Continuing to allow unfair competition from large online providers who pay 

little or no tax 

  Continuing to allow unfair competition from online retailing 
  Lack of support to independent retailers 
  Administrative interference by the state in corporate decision-making without 

considering the actual impact of laws and obligations 

  Competitive tendering favouring large specialist organisations 
  Market definition uncertainty over online sales and legal risk if brick and mortar 

retailers cooperate 

  Risk of environmental decisions devaluing the market 

Source: Analysis of responses to question Q4.3 

B5.4 Restrictions on cooperative and association agreements 

116 

 
 
 
 
Final Report 

Levelling the Playing Field 2.0 

To  gather  information more  specifically  on whether and  how  national  policy  might  impact 

the  operations  and  membership  of  the  organisations  responding  to  the  survey,  the 

respondents were asked if there were any specific restrictions set out by their national (or 

regional)  competition  authority  or  other  national  regulator  regarding  co-operative 

agreements,  buying  organisations,  and  associations  of  independent  companies,  such  as 

market  share  limits,  legislative  restrictions  or  regulations  (Q4.4).    For  this  question,  seven 

respondents  answered  “none”.    Of  the  remaining  responses,  18  examples  of  specific 

restrictions  or  regulations  were  cited,  as  summarised  by  their  category  rank  in  Table  B20.  

The majority of these relate to vertical restraints policy and treatment, such as the need for 

selective distribution to ensure product diversity as well as about the legal uncertainty over 

vertical price fixing and use of maximum retail price maintenance, market share restrictions 

in  the  vertical  group  exemption,  not  allowing  fully  exclusive  purchasing  obligations,  and 

standardised pricing restrictions.  In addition, there restrictions were cited in regard to how 

competition authorities determined dominant positions with market power, deemed to exist 

with 30% national market share, as well as market share limits that could restrict the growth 

prospects  or  merger  opportunities  for  independent  retailer  groups,  not  least  because 

market  definition  could  be  determined  on  a  very  narrow  product  or  geographic  basis.  

Furthermore,  respondents  cited  how  opening  hour  restrictions  limited  their  ability  to 

compete effectively (especially with online retailers), how the absence of legislation against 

below-cost pricing was resulting in price dumping and predatory behaviour, and the risk that 

cooperatives could be subject to time limits on cooperative membership (in view of a 2015 

draft bill in France, which was later abandoned, intending to set a contract limit to 9 years 

without the possibility of tacit renewal).  

Table B20.  Restrictions and regulations affecting cooperative and association agreements  

Category 
Vertical restraints 

12 

Number  National or regional restrictions and regulations affecting cooperation 

  Competition law on selective distribution needs to ensure product diversity 
  Competition law restrictions on agreements with members (x 3) 
  Legal uncertainty over vertical price fixing 
  Market share restrictions in the vertical group exemption 
  Not allowing exclusive purchasing obligations 
  Restrictions by national competition Act (x 2) 
  Standardised pricing restrictions 
  Uncertainty over permitting use of maximum retail price maintenance 
  Vertical group exemption regulation and competition restrictions 
  Determining dominant position exists with 30% national market share 
  Market share limits 
  Absence of legislation against below-cost pricing 

  Draft bill (later abandoned) to limit cooperative membership contracts to nine 

years 

117 

Market power 

Below cost selling 

Cooperatives 

2 

1 

1 

 
 
 
Final Report 

Levelling the Playing Field 2.0 

Market definition 

Opening hours 

1 

1 

  Narrow market definition 

  Regulation of opening times 

Source: Analysis of responses to question Q4.4 

B5.5 National policy impeding competitiveness 

To  assess  the  different  ways  in  which  national  policy  might  hold  back  or  undermine  the 

competitiveness of independent retailer groups, respondents were asked what elements of 

national  policy  impede  their  organisation  and  members  with  respect  to  their  ability  to 

compete on effective terms and so could be detrimental to supporting effective competition 

and harmful to consumers (Q4.5).  Three respondents answered none.  Of the, 21 ways were 

cited, which have been categorised and summarised according to their category rank order 

in Table B21.  The table shows a broad spread, with five categories having three examples 

each,  and  a  further  five  categories  having  one  or  two  examples  each.    In  particular, 

bureaucracy  was  seen  as  undermining  competitiveness  by  raising  costs  associated  with 

administration  and  compliance,  planning  policy  was  constraining  store  development  and 

store  network  expansion,  so  affecting  efficiency,  and  similarly  pricing  restrictions  for 

independent  retailer  groups  and  cooperatives  was  affecting  competitiveness,  especially  in 

regard  to  running  promotions  and  ensuring  that  low  prices  were  being  maintained  across 

the retail membership network.  Retailer costs were also be driven up by renewable energy 

levies and waste disposal/recycling costs, which online retailers might be able to avoid. 

Table B21.  National policy affecting competitiveness  

Category 
Bureaucracy 

Number 
3 

Aspects of national policy affecting ability to compete effectively 
  Administration burden and costs arising if food inspections and wastage control 

Cooperatives 

Planning policy 

Pricing 

Vertical restraints 

Energy policy 

Below cost selling 

3 

3 

3 

3 

2 

1 

systems are introduced 

  Bureaucracy and administration burden associated with following labour laws 
  Bureaucracy and intrusion from price control authorities 
  Cooperatives prevented from adopting uniform pricing 
  Extend provisions consistently across all countries to allow for cooperatives to 

set common promoted prices for members 

  Extensive restrictions in terms of mutual exchanges 
  Planning and construction laws inhibiting the development of new stores 
  Planning policy constrains opening, expanding or renovating a retail business 
  Planning policy restraints 
  Legal uncertainty over permitting use of maximum retail price maintenance 
  Promotional price recommendations from suppliers should be allowed to be 

binding to avoid excessive and unprofessional price dumping 

  Restrictions for group members in terms of determining standardised pricing 
  Competition law on selective distribution needs to ensure product diversity 
  Not allowing exclusive purchasing obligations 
  Vehicles block exemption regulation 
  Renewable energy levy driving up retailer costs 
  Waste disposal regulations create unfair advantage to online retailers 
  Abolition of the ban on selling at cost price would be desirable, since it has not 

118 

 
 
 
Final Report 

Levelling the Playing Field 2.0 

worked in practice 

Market definition 

Marketing 

Public procurement 

1 

1 

1 

  Legal uncertainty when holding a high market share 

  Banning of concerted marketing activities 

  Public procurement requirements 

Source: Analysis of responses to question Q4.5 

B5.6 Horizontal and vertical relationship investigations and decisions 

To  ascertain  whether  there  had  been  specific  investigations  or  decisions  regarding  the 

contractual relations between members and the central organisation, the respondents were 

asked  what,  if  any,  horizontal  and  vertical  relationships  in  their  organisation  have  been 

reviewed, investigated or commented on by the national competition authority or a court of 

law and under what terms have these been permitted, limited or prohibited (Q4.6).  Fifteen 

respondents answered none.  Of the remaining responses, 9 specific restrictions were cited, 

as summarised by their category rank in Table B22.  All but one relates to restrictions arising 

from  what  are categorised  as  vertical  restraints  policy,  but  for  retailers’ cooperatives  they 

could  in  some  instances  instead  be  construed  as  horizontal  agreements  (e.g.  over  pricing 

agreements).      The  cited  examples  mostly  relate  to  large  retail  organisation  where 

authorities  might  consider  the  groups  hold  market  power,  in  which  case  there  might  be 

assessment of concept agreements as part of merger control and consideration of a breach 

of restrictions of for national competition act.  In addition, though, there are quite specific 

limitations  and  constraints  imposed on  vertical  agreements,  such  as  assortment  selections 

for  retail  chains  accepted  if  not  exceeding  80%  of  stores  sales  or  maximum  retail  prices 

allowed on own and exclusive  products if not  exceeding 75%  of category  sales.  However, 

there were blanket bans like the decision not to accept any exclusive purchasing obligations 

for one large retail group,  

As  well  as  requiring  self-assessment  on  other  vertical  restraints.    In  addition,  other 

respondents mentioned competition authority reviews in regard to national campaigns if not 

all retailers follow the recommended prices advertised and price profiles with the intention 

to limit their influence.  Aside from vertical restraints, the only other mentioned example is 

about involvement with a review of online sales, which resulted in no objections. 

Table B22.  Specific national restrictions on cooperatives or groups of independents  

Category 
Vertical restraints 

Assessment of concept agreements as part of merger control and potentially a 
breach of restrictions of Competition Act 

Restrictions 

119 

 
 
 
 
Final Report 

Levelling the Playing Field 2.0 

Vertical restraints 

Assortment selections for retail chains accepted if not exceeding 80% of stores 
sales 

Vertical restraints  Decision not to accept any exclusive purchasing obligations 

Vertical restraints  Maximum retail prices allowed on own and exclusive products if not exceeding 

Vertical restraints 

Vertical restraints 

Vertical restraints 

75% of category sales 
Required self-assessment 

Review of national campaigns if not all retailers follow the recommended prices 
advertised 
Review of price profiles limiting their influence 

Vertical restraints 

Vertical group exemption regulation 

Online sales 

Part of EU sector inquiry on online sales platforms but no resulting objections 

Source: Analysis of responses to question Q4.6 

B5.7 Different regulations and policies in other EU Member States 

To  understand  whether  the  same  rules  and  policy  treatments  were  being  applied  equally 

across  the  EU,  the  respondents  were  asked  what,  if  any,  policy/regulation  benefits  are 

available  in  other  EU  Member  States  to  equivalent  organisations  and  members  that  their 

own organisation and members are unable to enjoy because of present national policy and 

regulations (Q4.7).  This question yielded on a limited number of responses, of which there 

were  eight  in  total  and  three  of  these  said  there  were  none.    Of  the  remaining  five 

respondents,  two  respondents  focused  on  the  benefits  that  cooperatives  could  enjoy  in  a 

different  member  state  compared  to  the  legal  treatment  in  their  own  country,  where 

retailers’  cooperatives  were  allowed  to  cooperate  with  a  common  online  platform  with 

common pricing and given more ability to set and manage common pricing. In addition, one 

respondent  mentioned  that  there  were  less  restrictive  shop  opening  hours  in  other  EU 

countries  than  in  their  own  country.    Another  respondent  intimated  that  in  other  EU 

countries  there  is  support  for  state  subsidies  for  digitalisation  and  visiting  trade  shows 

abroad  that  is  not  supported  by  their  own  country’s  government  or  authorities.    The 

remaining  respondent  focused  on  the  need  for  market  entry  conditions  and  the  ability  to 

stop the expansion of “huge foreign retailers” in view of the considerable structural changes 

taking place  in grocery retailing in the respondent’s own country and the  limited ability of 

small-store  format  domestic  retailers  to  compete  against  larger  and  heavily  resourced 

international retailers. 

B5.8 Imminent national policy changes 

120 

 
 
 
 
Final Report 

Levelling the Playing Field 2.0 

As  a  final  question  on  national  policy  and  looking  forwards  in  time,  the  respondents  were 

asked  whether  they  were  aware  of  any  imminent  policy  changes,  industry  reviews,  or 

relevant company/merger investigations (Q4.8). From the 21 responses, 16 respondents said 

that  they  were  not  aware  of  any.     Four responses  focused on  potential  measures  against 

unfair trading practices (UTPs), including a possible amendment to the national competition 

act prohibiting retailers from inducing suppliers to grant them benefits without any objective 

justification  and  enforcing  the  ban  on  selling  food  items  below  cost,  as  well  as  suggested 

national  and  EU  level  legislation  on  payment  terms  limited  to  30  days,  and  suggested 

legislation  on  unfair  trade  practices  applied  in  the  food  industry.    In  addition,  another 

respondent commented on imminent legislation for a national strategy on the food chain in 

their own country, indicating that this was partly about food security but also concern the 

welfare of farmers and margins and terms of trade within the food sector. 

B6. European policy 

B6.1 European (EU) competition policy impact 

Moving on from questions about national policy to a series of questions about EU policy, the 

respondents  were  first  asked  about  the  ways  in  which  current  European  (EU)  competition 

policy  impacts  their  organisation  and  independent  retailer  members  (Q4.9).    Of  the  20 

responses to the question, three said that there was no impact and one said negatively in an 

overall  and  non-specific  sense. 

  The  remaining  16  responses  are  categorised  and 

summarised  in  Table  B23.    The  category  with  the  highest  number  of  cited  examples  is  in 

regard to vertical restraints policy, where there are specific instances relating to the vertical 

agreements  block  exemption  regulation,  prohibition  of  resale  price  maintenance,  and  the 

group and vehicles block exemption regulations.  The next category is about the influence of 

EU policy more generally in respect of dominating national policy and the failure of both EU 

and  national  policies  to  understand  the  nature  of  cooperative  retail  for consumer  benefit.  

The  third  category  is  about  bureaucracy  and  the  administrative  and  compliance  burden 

impacting small businesses and retail organisations in particular, with an example about the 

failure of the EU to control the existence different labelling laws in EU member states which 

were acting to raise costs for international retailers.  The other three mentioned examples 

also relate to international retailing in respect of the inability to promote the nationality of 

121 

 
 
 
 
 
Final Report 

Levelling the Playing Field 2.0 

goods and services, the lack of tax harmonisation allowing for the creation and abuse of tax 

havens  by  international  companies  seeking  to  avoid  paying  taxes,  and  the  impact  of  the 

tobacco  products  directive  which  is  viewed  as  favouring  large  international  organisations 

over small and medium sized enterprises (SMEs).  

Table B23.  EU policy impact on independent retailer groups  

Category 
Vertical restraints 

Number 
6 

EU policy impacting respondent organisations 
  Promotion of fair business practices through participation in the Supply Chain 

Initiative 

  Vertical agreements block exemption regulation 
  Competition policy against resale price maintenance 
  Group exemption regulation 330/2010 excludes certain groups from 

competition-reducing agreements 

  Prohibition of resale price maintenance  
  Vehicles block exemption regulation 
  EU policy leads and dominates national policy 
  Failure of EU and national policies to understand the nature of cooperative 

retail for consumer benefit 

  National competition law more or less resembles EU competition policy 
  National policy is conditioned by EU policy 
  Excessive regulations and legal requirements in the EU 
  Leads to excessive bureaucracy 
  Legal differences across the EU on labelling adding to costs 
  Prevention of promoting nationality 

  Tax legislation allows migration of companies to tax havens 

  Tobacco Products Directive requirements favour large international 

organisations over SMEs 

Policy agenda 

Bureaucracy 

Internal market 

Tax policy 

EU directive 

4 

3 

1 

1 

1 

Source: Analysis of responses to question Q4.9 

B6.2 Desired changes in EU policy 

In  view  of  the  concerns  that  independent  retailer  groups  might  have  about  competition 

policy  and  EU  regulations in  general,  respondents  were  asked  about  what  they  would  like 

changed and how  these changes  could benefit their organisation, their members and end-

consumers (Q4.10).  There were 26 responses which have been categorised and summarised 

in  Table  B24.    The  most  frequently  mentioned  cases  relate  to  be  allowed  to  use  common 

pricing  and  RPM  for  the  sake  of  being  competitive.    Also  respondents  wanted  equality  of 

treatment for their organisations compared to other retail forms, as well as aspects relating 

to tax policy, the internal market, and various marketing and agreement arrangements. 

Table B24.  Desired EU policy changes 

122 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Final Report 

Levelling the Playing Field 2.0 

Category 
Pricing 

Number 
6 

Specific examples of desired EU policy changes 

  Allow common pricing online on certain competitive products 
  Allow consistent pricing and advertising 
  Allow maximum retail prices on all products and appropriate incentives for 

retailers to comply and benefit consumers with lower prices 

  Allowing increased retailer cooperation to establish common pricing and 

platform online 

  Remove ban on communicating consistent pricing for independent retailer 

groups 

  RPM, at least for the online sales and for a certain number of not defined 

products during a certain period 

Equality 

4 

  Allow networks of independent retailers access to the same competitive tools 

as integrated networks 

  Create the same conditions for all providers in the market 
  EU commission should abandon its anti-retail attitudes which are jeopardising 

independent retailing  

  Regulations to take into account the special characteristics of independent 

retailer groups to benefit consumers and allow adapting to changing trading 
conditions 

  Harmonise sales and profits taxes 
  Harmonization of fiscal rules to ensure online sellers have the same costs, 

recycling fees and copyright fees as physical stores 

  Standard European tax for all companies on turnover or profit 
  Harmonization of the legislation in the EU 
  Reduce bureaucratic obstacles on cross-border trade 
  Avoid regulation on distribution 
  Stop European legislation regulating business practices along the food supply 
chain which will restrict flexibility and freedom of contract to the detriment of 
suppliers and retailers 

  Abolish required tendering systems for regulated medical goods 

  Support the creation of e-commerce platforms for SMEs 

  More market liberalisation policies 

  Limits on the expansion and practices of multinational retail companies 

  Allow exclusive purchasing obligation on retailers to obtain better commercial 

terms from suppliers to benefit consumers with lower prices 

  Avoid regulation on unfair trading practices (uphold freedom of contract) 

  Clearly define regulations for selective distribution 

  Allow concerted marketing activities 

  Ensure EU regulations have an expiration date for continuous review 

Tax policy 

Internal market 

Vertical restraints 

Regulated goods 

E-Commerce 

Liberalisation 

Entry restrictions 

Exclusive 
purchasing 
Unfair trading 
practices 
Selective 
distribution 
Marketing 

Review dates 

3 

2 

2 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

Source: Analysis of responses to question Q4.10 

B6.3 Alternative options for policy change 

123 

 
 
Final Report 

Levelling the Playing Field 2.0 

Apart from their most desired policy changes as addressed by the previous question and the 

long  list  of  response  shown  in  Table  B24,  the  respondents  were  also  asked  as  to  what 

alternative options they would wish to put forward for policy change that could be justified 

as  being  the  least  restrictive  to  achieve  the  required  benefits  (Q4.11).    There  were  19 

responses, of which one said none and the other 18 responses are summarised in Table B25 

and shown in categories by rank order.  Again, pricing features as the leading category for 

suggested  policy  changes,  focused  on  the  need  and  advantages  of  common  prices,  price 

fixing  on  certain  products,  and  allowing  maximum  retail  prices  on  all  products  to  benefit 

consumers with lower prices overall.  In addition, there was a diverse range of suggestions 

covering other categories, including (in alphabetical order) bureaucracy, equality, exclusive 

purchasing,  online  coordination  support,  tax  policy,  environment  policy,  entrepreneur 

support, subsidiarity, and voluntary agreements. 

Table B25.  Alternative least-restrictive options for policies  

Category 
Pricing 

Number 
4 

Bureaucracy 

Equality 

Exclusive 
purchasing 

2 

2 

2 

Online coordination 

2 

Tax policy 

Environment policy 

Entrepreneur 
support 
Subsidiarity 

Voluntary 
agreements 

2 

1 

1 

1 

1 

Alternative options as least restrictive for EU policy 

 Allow common regional/national level price and platform online 
 Allow maximum retail prices on all products and appropriate incentives for 

retailers to comply and benefit consumers with lower prices 

 Allow price fixing for certain products and services 
 Remove ban on communicating consistent pricing for independent retailer 

groups 

 Curtail bureaucratic burden on national operators which favours international 

competitors 

 Reduce bureaucratic obstacles on cross-border trade 
 Groups to be given more opportunities to act consistently to overcome blatant 

competitive disadvantage compared to large integrated chains 

 There is no alternative for the survival of the independent commerce group or 

franchise model. 

 Allow exclusive purchasing obligation on retailers to obtain better commercial 

terms from suppliers to benefit consumers with lower prices 

 Return to exclusivity negotiations for supply contracts 
 Allow retailer groups to strengthen joint online presence either by group 

members conducting sales directly and jointly or via an online platformer set by 
the central office with fulfilment handled by group members 

 Support the creation of e-commerce platforms for SMEs 
 Harmonise sales and profits taxes 
 Tax relief for SMEs 
 Integrate cross border regulations on recycling costs 

 Recognition and support for entrepreneurship in wealth creation and social 

commitment 

 Subsidiarity (i.e. policy matters should be dealt with at the most immediate and 

relevant level rather than unnecessarily at the EU level) 

 Develop Supply Chain Initiative further without legislative regulation to develop 

flexible solutions that protect freedom of contract and competition 

Source: Analysis of responses to question Q4.11 

B6.4 Degree of alignment between members’ and organisation’s policy views 

124 

 
 
 
 
 
Final Report 

Levelling the Playing Field 2.0 

In being conscious that the person serving as the respondent would provide views that were 

representative  of  the  organisation  but  not  necessarily  the  entire  membership,  the 

respondents were asked explicitly whether they considered there were any dissenting views 

amongst their independent retailer members on the most urgently required policy changes.  

There were thirteen responses of which seven said “no”, three said “not known”, one said 

that  there  were  differences  of  opinions  regarding  opening  hours  and  planning  policy,  one 

said that individual retail members may want to remain free to set their prices and choose 

where  to  source  products,  and  the  last  one  said  that  possibly  but  that  as  a  retailers’ 

association then it expresses its own views as a collective. 

B6.5 Possible future challenges by competition authorities 

In  looking  forwards  in  time,  the  respondents  were  asked  to  consider  whether  there  were 

aspects of their organisation that may face possible challenges by competition authorities in 

the  future  and  how  then  the  organisation  would  cope  if  they  were  no  longer  able  to  use 

these  arrangements,  as  well  as  how  these  changes  benefit  or  hinder  your  organisation, 

independent  retailer  members,  and  end-customers  (Q4.13). 

  There  were  fourteen 

responses,  three  said  none  and  the  responses  from  the  other  eleven  are  summarised  in 

categories and reported in Table B26.  The leading category relate to vertical restraints were 

there  was  concern  about  future  challenges  in  respect  of  exclusive  purchasing,  quantity 

purchasing obligations, maximum retail price maintenances, as well as tightening the price 

harmonisation  and  standardisation  ban. 

In  addition  there  were  concerns  about 

investigations  or  future  decisions  which  would  limit  or  further  restrict  joint  marketing, 

sourcing  cooperation,  and  treatment of  agreements  that  could  be  construed  as  horizontal 

rather than vertical agreements. 

Table B26.  Possible future challenges by completion authorities 

Category 
Vertical restraints 

Number 
6 

Marketing 

Assessment 

Cooperation 

SME support 

2 

1 

1 

1 

Areas for possible future competition authority challenges 

  Exclusive purchasing 
  Maximum retail price maintenance 
  Obligation to purchase a certain quota of merchandise 
  Preventing centrally driven sales support efforts to members 
  Private label 
  Tightening the price harmonisation and standardisation ban 
  Joint marketing  
  TV advertising 
  Legal exposure if view of relationships reversed from vertical to horizontal 

  Sourcing cooperation (possible UTP legislation) 

  Financial support for SMEs 

Source: Analysis of responses to question Q4.13 

125 

 
 
 
 
 
Final Report 

Levelling the Playing Field 2.0 

B6.6 Future features of competition requiring policy changes 

As  the  final  question  on  the  questionnaire,  the  respondents  were  asked  about  what 

emerging  or  future  features  of  competition  are  likely  to  put  their  organisation  and 

membership at a (further) competitive disadvantage if changes to policy are not forthcoming 

(Q4.14).  There  were  seventeen  responses  which  are categorised  and  summarised  in  Table 

B27.      The  largest  and  top  ranked  category  relates  to  online  retailing  as  the  critical  area 

where there is an increasing concern that retailers specialising in physical stores will be at a 

competitive  disadvantage  compared  to  online  retailers  and  particularly  that  independent 

retailer groups are not well positioned because of policy restrictions in being able to develop 

integrated and efficient online operations of a sufficient scale and degree of competitiveness 

to  meet  the  challenge  of  competing  with  specialist  online  retailers  unless  there  is  policy 

change.    In  addition,  there  are  examples  cited  from  other  categories,  notably  around  the 

food chain, pricing restrictions, vertical restraints policy, contract law, market definition and 

unfair  trading  practices,  as  well  as  the  concerns  of  ever  widening  inequality  between 

independent and integrated retailer groups as well as between SMEs and large corporations. 

Table B27.  Future features of competition requiring policy changes  

Category 
Online 

Number 
5 

Food chain 

Pricing 

Vertical restraints 

Alignment 

Contract law 

Financing 

Inequality 

Market definition 

Unfair trading 
practices 

2 

2 

2 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

Desired changes to EU policy for emerging and future competition 

 Competitive disadvantage with online retail widening  
 Developments in e-commerce and marketplace aggregators 
 Growing threat from large-scale online food retailers undermining viability of 

rural retailers and reducing the efficiency of urban retailers 

 Increasing share of online sales 
 Unequal treatment of store-based and online retailer 
 Food chain policy and crisis in farming 
 Supply Chain Initiative 
 Legal uncertainty of maximum retail prices 
 Need to permit consistent pricing and promotions across channels 
 Exclusive supply obligations 
 Regulation of payment terms 
 Aligning rights of independent retailer groups with integrated retailers if 

membership consents 

 Contract law reforms to strengthen protection of retailers' interests 

 Imbalance in funding and availability of credit adversely impacting independent 

retailers competing with integrated chains 

 SME retailers will disappear if disadvantages compared to integrated chains 

remain 

 Market definition and share thresholds 

 Clarifying laws on unfair trading practices 

Source: Analysis of responses to question Q4.14 

Respondents  also  pointed  out  that  many  of  these  aspects  are  interconnected,  notably 

regarding online retail developments which tie together advantages relating to negotiating 

126 

 
 
 
 
Final Report 

Levelling the Playing Field 2.0 

power with respect to suppliers and the ability to have a consistent online retail offer and 

standardised prices.   

As  a  means  to  conclude  this  review  of  the  questionnaire  responses,  and  as  indication  of 

future competition, we end this report with the summary view from one respondent in the 

context of the emerging development of online grocery retailing, which is still in its infancy 

in many EU countries but which looks set to grow rapidly  as a form of retailing for grocery 

shopping  in  the  coming  years.    To  illustrate  how  the  series  of  interconnections  work,  the 

respondent  (in  representing  a  large  independent  retailer  group  operating  with  different 

retail chains) points to the greater negotiating power of an integrated retailer in contrast to 

its own weaker negotiating position and inability to control purchasing costs as effectively as 

it would like in the following terms (in anonymised form): 

“Large-scale  online  food  retailers  entering  the  market  will  become  an  enormous 
challenge  for  food  retailer  groups.    These  retailers  will  be  able  to  deliver  a  broad  and 
specialised  range  of  food  products  in  urban  areas.  As  consumer  acceptance  of  online 
retail  increases,  this  creates  a  strong  new  distribution  channel  which  could  become  an 
existential threat for some independent food retailers. It might be possible to deal with 
this  from  a  competition  perspective  if  it  were  not  for  independent  retailers  (even  in 
groups) being structurally disadvantaged in terms of the currently  existing difficulties of 
operating their own online platform. 

In  rural  areas,  on  the  other  hand,  online  retail  might  not  only  threaten  the  local  food 
retailers’ business, but also lead to significant disadvantages for consumers: 

The  customer  does  not  expect  a  full  product  range,  even  from  a  large-scale  online 
provider  –  in  other  words,  he  does  not  expect  that  an  online  food  retailer  necessarily 
carries  all  the  required  items.  This  allows  the  online  food  retailer  to  focus  the  product 
range on regions that are most profitable in terms of the logistics costs which may differ 
greatly depending on the product range.  

Currently,  only  urban  conglomerations  can  be  profitable  for  online  food  retailers  and 
delivery  services. Online  food retailers are currently generally restricting the delivery of 
merchandise in rural areas to products that do not require refrigeration, due to the high 
costs of refrigerated transport. They are increasingly competing against the locally-based 
retailers in rural areas. What appears to be a positive factor for consumer welfare at first 
glance  (i.e.  an  additional  provider  in  a  rural  area),  actually  proves  to  have  negative 
consequences  on  closer  inspection:  as  even  relatively  small  losses  in  turnover  generally 
result in dramatic profit losses for store-based retailers because of their high overheads, 
particularly smaller independent food retailers in  rural areas can find themselves under 
threat from a single online competitor supplying only a part of their product range (i.e. 
anything that does not require refrigeration). If, as a result, the store-based retailer goes 
out  of  business,  his  product  range  (now  no  longer  available)  can  only  be  partially 
substituted  by  the  online  retailer  (i.e.  with  foods  that  do  not  require  refrigeration).  Or, 
consumers with restricted mobility or who are not particularly Internet-savvy will have to 

127 

 
 
 
Final Report 

Levelling the Playing Field 2.0 

put  up  with  much  higher  delivery  charges  to  allow  the  online  retailer  to  supply  rural 
areas with refrigerated merchandise.” 

The respondent indicates that now is the time for policy change while there is still the 

opportunity for independent retailer groups to establish a competitive online presence 

by being allowed the same benefits and freedom to operate as integrated retailers are 

permitted;  simply  and  only  because  of  their  different  ownership  and  contractual 

structure  as  a  retail  group.    The  response  suggests  that  if  policy  changes  are  not 

forthcoming then consumers will ultimately suffer from reduced competition and less 

choice in the future. 

128 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Final Report 

Levelling the Playing Field 2.0 

APPENDIX C 

EXAMPLES OF THE DEVELOPMENT AND NATIONAL 
POLICY TREATMENT OF INDEPENDENT RETAILER 
GROUPS 

C.1 

Independent retailer groups have existed in Europe for over a 100 years, often starting out 

as  purchasing  groups  but  then  developing  as  branded  retail  organisations  with  integrated 

supply  and  distribution  systems  and  yet  retaining  retail  outlet  operations  as  owned  and 

controlled  by  independent  retail  entrepreneurs.    The  development  of  these  groups  has 

varied from country to country and sector to sector, with the differences influenced by the 

legal,  cultural,  economic  and  social  situations  in  the  countries  in  which  they  developed.   

Several  of  these  groups  are  now  some  of  the  largest  retail  and  trading  organisations  in 

Europe.  These include large international associations acting as brand umbrella groups for 

sector-specialist 

independent  retailers, 

like  SPAR 

(food  and  convenience  stores), 

INTERSPORT  (sports  goods),  Euronics  (electrical  goods),  Expert  International  (electrical 

goods), and Sport 2000 (sports goods), as well as large groupings focused predominantly on 

grocery  retailing  like  EDEKA,  REWE  Group,  E.  Leclerc,  Intermarche,  Système  U,  ICA,  and 

CONAD,  or across  broad range  of retail sectors, like  Kesko (covering grocery, automobiles, 

building and home improvement, machinery, electrical goods, and leisure goods).  There are 

also  smaller  specialist  groups,  like  3e  (trade  tools),  and  a  wide  assortment  of  retailer 

cooperatives, especially in countries where there is a strong tradition for cooperatives across 

a range of economic sectors, notably in France and Germany42, but also widely across the EU 

for specific retail sectors (e.g. for pharmacies).   

C.2 

To  provide  a  flavour  of  the  different  character  and  development  of  independent  retailer 

groups,  boxed  Exhibit  C.1  gives  a  brief  summary  as  an  alphabetical  listing  of  14  leading 

independent  retailer  groups  that  compete  in  European  markets  and  represent  significant 

operations  in  their  product  area  as  a  challenge  to  integrated  retailers  and  other  retail 

42    For  example,  in  Germany,  53  cooperatives  in  the  food  and  associated  retail  trades  generated 
€80bn  in  sales  and  98  cooperatives  in  non-food  retail  trade  (e.g.  domestic  appliances,  shoes, 
pharmacies,  chemists,  textiles)  generated  €24bn  in  sales  in  2014  –  source:  Facts  and  Figures: 
Cooperative 
Cooperatives 
(https://www.dgrv.de/en/cooperatives/$file/Facts_and_Figures.pdf). 

Commodity 

Service 

Banks, 

and 

129 

 
 
 
 
 
                                                      
Final Report 

Levelling the Playing Field 2.0 

organisational  forms.    Many  of  these  organisations  have  a  long  history  with  a  common 

starting point as a joint buying organisation, seeking to obtain better prices from suppliers, 

which  could  then  allow  the  independent  retailers  to  offer  consumers  lower  retail  prices, 

which in turn increased their sales and fed a virtuous circle of growth, where  larger orders 

from suppliers enabled retailers to obtain further discounts, and so on.  Today, the onus is 

also  on  promoting  a  recognisable  brand  name  and  a  consistent  retail  proposition,  so 

interdependence has become ever more important for independent retailers.   

Exhibit C.1 – Examples of leading independent retailer groups (alphabetical) 

3e  –  is  an  association  of  specialist  dealers  in  the  hardware  industry  based  in  Austria. 
Formed  in  1989  from  the  merger  of  three  hardware  associations,  it  bundles  the 
purchasing  activities  for  250  companies  and  provides  joint  market  concepts.  Group 
member sales were €568 million in 2017, of which €416 million were in Austria.  

CONAD  (Consorzio  Nazionale  Dettaglianti)  –  operates  one  of  the  largest  supermarket 
chains in Italy. Created in 1962, Conad is a cooperative system of entrepreneurs, dealing 
in large-scale distribution. It is structured on three levels: entrepreneur members (owners 
of retail outlets), cooperatives (large shopping and distribution centres), and the national 
consortium  (a  service  and  market-oriented  body  for  member  companies).    CONAD 
achieved €13bn sales in 2017, through 3,198 outlets and with around 52,000 employees. 

is  a  German  cooperative  group  established 

in  1898  as  the  E.d.K. 
EDEKA  – 
(Einkaufsgenossenschaft  der  Kolonialwarenhändler  im  Halleschen  Torbezirk  zu  Berlin, 
“Purchasing  Cooperative  of  Colonial  Goods  Retailers  in  the  Hallesches  Tor  district  of 
Berlin”), and renamed EDEKA in 1913.  EDEKA generated €49.6bn sales in 2016 through its 
11,200 stores, with over 4,000 self-employed retailers and over 351,500 employees.  

E.Leclerc  –  is  a  French  cooperative  group  and  hypermarket  chain,  established  in  1948. 
Members  commit  to  sell  at  discount  prices,  distribute  25%  of  store  profits  to  the 
employees,  work  part-time  in  the  Group’s  operational  and  commercial  functions 
(purchasing  and  sourcing),  and  sponsor  store  employees  to  become  independent 
storeowners.  Sales were €46bn in 2017 through 2000 stores. 

Euronics – formed in 1968 and based in Amsterdam, it functions as a leading international 
electrical retail group on behalf of its members as an international association with a GEIE 
(“Groupement européen d'intérêt économique”) structure made up of 29 national retail 
associations serving 5,500 retail entrepreneurs with 8,800 stores in 36 countries with total 
sales of €19bn in 2016. 

Expert  International  –  a  Swiss-based  consumer  electronics  purchasing  and  retail  group 
formed originally in 1967 with its current  name from 1971. National retail organisations 
coordinate  the  buying  for  independent  retailers,  covering  more  than  3,600  stores  in  21 
countries, with total retail sales of €13bn in 2017.   

ICA – traces its origins in Sweden to Hakonbolaget started in 1917 and formed as ICA in 
1938, developing with individual retailers owning their own stores  and joining forces so 

130 

 
 
 
Final Report 

Levelling the Playing Field 2.0 

that through coordinated purchasing and other forms of collaboration, they could achieve 
the  same  economies  of  scale  as  chain  enterprises,  while  combining  collaboration  with 
local adaptation. ICA Gruppen achieved sales of SEK 104bn in 2016 through 2,103 stores 
and pharmacies.  

INTERSPORT  –  established  in  1968  from  10  national  buying  organisations,  is  an 
international sporting goods purchasing group and retail brand based in Switzerland, with 
more  than  5600  outlets  as  licensees  across  45  countries  generating  global  sales  of 
€11.5bn in 2017. 

ITM  (Intermarché)  –  is  a  network  of  independent  supermarket  store  owners  ITM 
Entreprises owning the majority stake in Intermarché, part of the large French retail group 
'Les Mousquetaires' started in 1969 under the name EX Offices de distribution, renamed 
Intermarché in 1972.  Each of the 3,000 members run their store as well as contribute two 
days  a  week  to  the  management  of  the  group’s  central  operations,  helping  to  promote 
interdependence  and  solidarity.  Grocery  retail  sales  were  €25.8bn  (excluding  fuel)  in 
2016. 

Kesko – operates in the grocery trade, the building and technical trade and the car trade, 
with its divisions and chains acting in close  cooperation with retailer entrepreneurs and 
other  partners.    Formed  in  Finland  through  the  merger  of  four  regional  wholesalers 
founded by retailers in 1940, supplying K-retailers as retail entrepreneurs, Kesko moved to 
a chain operation in 1990 and then internationalisation. It now has over 2000 stores with 
sales of €13.2 billion in 2016.  

REWE Group – is a German diversified retail and tourism cooperative group, initiated in 
1927.  Its  name  is  derived  from  “Revisionsverband  der  Westkauf-Genossenschaften” 
(meaning “Auditing  Association of Western Purchasing  Co-operatives”). The  basis  of  the 
cooperative  trade  group  consists  of  a  network  of  independent  retailers.  REWE  Group 
turnover  was  €57.8bn  in  2017  through  more  than  15,000  stores  across  21  European 
countries with 350,000 employees. 

SPAR International – formed in 1932 with its headquarters in Amsterdam, operates with 
independent retailers and wholesalers who work together in partnership under the SPAR 
Brand, and represents the world’s largest voluntary food retail chain, with 12,545 stores, 
as SPAR Partners, in 44 countries and a global turnover of €33.1bn in 2016. 

Sport 2000 – founded in 1966 in France, has expanded internationally to become one of 
the world's largest purchasing cooperatives of independent sports retailers, representing 
3,855  stores  (with  1,157  branded  stores)  in  24  countries,  achieving  €6.4bn  sales  (2014) 
and with 35,000 employees. 

Système  U  –  is  a  French  retailers'  cooperative,  with  a  history  going  back  to  1894, 
comprising  about  independent  hypermarkets,  supermarkets  and  convenience  stores, 
where the independent grocery retailers (adhérents/members) own the majority stake in 
Système U. Sales were €20bn in 2016 made through 1550 stores. 

Source: author’s analysis based on corporate websites and Planet Retail 

131 

 
 
 
 
Final Report 

Levelling the Playing Field 2.0 

C.3  Over  time,  independent  retailer  groups  have  evolved  to  fit  with  the  political,  legal, 

economic,  social  and  technological  environmental  forces  shaping  retailing. 

  As  a 

representation  of  the  evolutionary  process  in  one  country,  the  boxed  Exhibit  C.2  provides 

the  example  of  France  where  independent  retailer  groups,  especially  in  the  form  of 

membership  cooperatives,  have  played  an  instrumental  part  in  the  historical  and  current 

development of retail competition in that country over the past century and more.43  

Exhibit C.2 - The history and evolution of cooperatives and independent retailer 
groups in France 

1885  to  1914:  Independent  grocers  facing  the  growing  competitive  challenge  from 
□ 
new  commercial  enterprises  such  as  chain  stores  decide  to  group  together  to  become 
more competitive. The first procurement group, “Le Pain Quotidien” (the daily bread), was 
founded in Nantes in 1894. The phenomenon of uniting in groups subsequently spread to 
other  regions  as  retail  competition  intensified,  with  procurement  societies  founded  in 
Agen in 1908 and Bordeaux in 1913. Non-food retailers did not experience the same level 
of risk from competition but there were some attempts to set up groups in the pharmacy, 
ironmongery  and  general  merchandise,  haberdashery  and  hosiery  sectors.  At  the  same 
time,  not  as  a  response  to  a  competitive  risk  but  rather  for  promotional  purposes, 
watchmakers and jewellers united within a syndicate which filed a brand – ‘Paris-Province’ 
– the precursor to the goldsmiths’ guild (now Synalia). 

□ 
1918  to  1945:  The  federation  of  grocers’  syndicates  decided  to  distinguish  the 
purpose of representing its members, in its strictest sense, from that of joint procurement, 
which  had  to  be  carried  out  from  within  the  framework  of  a  suitable  organisation, 
represented in the form of a joint procurement society. The number of joint procurement 
societies  increased  in  several  sectors  in  view  of  the  increasing  competitive  threat 
presented by the new forms of trading. Examples included the founding of the Société des 
épiciers détaillants de la région parisienne (SED; Society of retail grocers in greater Paris) in 
1919;  Alliance  céramique  (tableware)  in  1930;  Centres  d’études  et  de  répartition 
pharmaceutiques  (CERP;  Centre  for  pharmaceutical  studies  and  distribution),  integrated 
with the Comptoir national de la pharmacie française (national association of pharmacies) 
in  1940,  and  the  La  Hutte  stores  (today's  INTERSPORT)  merging  in  1924.  The  economic 

in  France”, 

43  For  more  details  about  the  development  of  retailer  cooperatives  in  France,  see  Fabrice  Cassou, 
Gérard  Cliquet  and  Rozenn  Perrigot,  “Uniformity  in  Collective  Entrepreneurship:  The  Case  of  Food 
in  Management  and  Governance  of  Networks:  Franchising, 
Retail  Cooperatives 
Cooperatives,  and  Strategic  Alliances,  edited  by  G.W.J.  Hendrikse,  G.  Cliquet,  T.  Ehrmann,  and  J. 
Windsperger,  pp.193-211,  2017,  Springer 
International  Publishing.  For  a  different  country 
perspective,  covering  cooperative  buying  in  Croatia,  see  Mirko  Palić,  Ivan  Kovač,  and  Boris  Sruk, 
“Cooperative  buying  as  a  source  of  competitive  advantage  on  the  Croatian  FMCG  retail  market”, 
Economic  Integrations,  Competition  and  Cooperation  Conference  Proceedings,  Vinko  Kandžija  and 
Andrej Kumar (eds), 2013. 306-313.  

132 

 
 
 
 
 
                                                      
Final Report 

Levelling the Playing Field 2.0 

crisis of 1929 and the resulting fall in consumer spending power forced “new” retailers to 
revise their strategy. This led to the growth of department stores and the development of 
mail-order  purchasing  (La  Redoute  in  1922  and  Les  Trois  Suisses  in  1932)  and  the  first 
indicative  emergence  of  a  proto-type  franchise  network  by  retailers  marketing  Roubaix 
wool under the brand name Pingouin-Stemm in 1928. 

1949 to 1963: After the Second World War, the emphasis was on a return to freedom 
□ 
joint  procurement  groups  were  established:  Copamétal 
of  supply.  A  number  of 
(ironmongery,  1953),  Société  des  papetiers  détaillants  (stationery  retailers,  1953),  Union 
des chausseurs français (shoemakers, later became Arbell, 1953), Société coopérative des 
libraires  (booksellers,  later  became  Majuscule,  1953),  Union  Franco-européenne  du 
meuble  (became  Monsieur  Meuble,  1953).  Whilst  supermarkets  first  appeared  during 
1947/8,  they  become  gradually  larger  through  the  1950s  into  the  early  1960s  (e.g.  E. 
Leclerc). 

□ 
1963  to  1972:  In  1963,  the  first  Carrefour  hypermarket-sized  store  opens  with 
2,500m2 of retail space and 450 parking spaces opens. By the end of 1971, there are 2,060 
supermarkets  and  147  hypermarkets.  But,  as  early  as  1970,  a  new  form  of  commerce 
arrives on the scene from the United States through the development of retail malls, with 
the first French shopping centre – ‘Parly II’ – opened with a retail space of 40,000m2. This 
ushered  in  new  forms  of  commercial  structures,  bringing  together  different  types  of 
specialist retailers under one roof. 

□ 
1973 to 1989: Following a period of economic growth, the retail sector is affected by 
the economic downturn connected to the 1973 oil crisis. Moreover, the ‘Royer’ law from 
27  December  1973  curtailed  the  development  of  large-scale  retailing  (restricting  the 
construction of supermarkets over 1,000 m²).  The combination of the two effects led the 
development  of  specialised  retailing  through  a  new practice:  franchising.  Retailer  groups 
followed  this  evolution  and  offered  new  services,  beyond  joint  procurement,  including 
stock  development,  location  searches  and  establishing  store  fascia  as  a  common  brand. 
Retail  cooperatives  also  followed  these  developments  and  obtained  legal  recognition 
when the law of 11 July 1972 was passed. 

□ 
1990  to  today:  During  the  1990s,  the  retail  sector  underwent  changes  in  difficult 
economic circumstances. Designed to protect smaller retailers, the ‘Royer’ law ultimately 
contributed  to  the  rise  of  discount  stores.  Large  specialist  organisations  (as  integrated 
networks) were able to strengthen their position in the non-food sector (including sports 
retailer  Decathlon  from  the  Auchan  group  and  the  US  retailer,  Toys’R’Us,  in  the  toy 
market). New players have appeared on the scene with the development of e-commerce 
(e.g.  Amazon.com,  booking.com).  In  this  context,  independent  retailer  groups  have 
continued  to  adapt  by  offering  ever  more  targeted  services  requiring 
increasing 
investment. Centralising online sales on a platform managed by the group is just one of the 
many areas of progress essential to surviving in a highly competitive market. 

□ 
Initial  conclusion:  This  quick  historical  recap  shows  that  individual  independent 
retailers have had no choice but to form groups and continually adapt them to changing 
market circumstances in order to grow and succeed in a competitive market.  The actions 
they have taken as part of a group allowed them to survive in highly competitive markets 

133 

 
 
Final Report 

Levelling the Playing Field 2.0 

intra-brand 
by  offering  consumers  similar  or  better  services.  The  restrictions  of 
competition  within  a  retailer  group  (common  brand,  common  commercial  policy, 
exclusivity zones, non-competition clauses, etc.) have always been essential in helping the 
cooperative  groups  to  position  themselves  as  credible  competitors  against  integrated 
networks. 

Source: Based on material supplied by the Fédération du Commerce Coopératif et Associé 
(FCA). 

C.4 

Legal  recognition  and  support  at  national  level  can  make  a  considerable  difference  to  the 

way that independent retailer groups can survive and prosper over time as the membership 

develops and changes.  As an illustration, boxed Exhibit C.3 shows how legal understanding 

in  France  of  the  specific  characteristics  of  groups  of  independent  traders  and  retailer 

cooperatives  helps  counter  the  problems  that  arise  from  the  structural  fragility  of  these 

organisations.  This legal support is an important counterweight to the simplistic treatment 

and characterisation that EU competition policy applies when it views retailer associations as 

simply a set of intrinsically anticompetitive horizontal and/or vertical agreements intended 

to restrict and thwart competition, which is their starting point (as evident from the wording 

in Article 101(1) TFEU) before consideration of their material effects, in respect of efficiency 

and distributional benefits set out in Article 101(3) TFEU).  It would be helpful for other EU 

countries without such rules and legal support towards independent retail groups to follow 

the example in France. 

Exhibit C.3 – Legal understanding in France of the specific characteristics of 
groups of independent traders 

Fragility of the groups linked to the free right of withdrawal of the shareholder trader 
Independent retailer groups are inherently fragile organisations because each shareholder 
trader  has  the  free  right  to  exit  the  group.    In this  regard,  traders  belonging  to  a  group 
hold capital shares in the group (or social shares in the case of groupings in cooperative or 
mutual form).  Through shareholder status (or as a cooperating partner or member), each 
trader benefits from the activities of the group.  As the trader is independent, it is free to 
withdraw, to obtain the refund of its social shares or capital shares, and therefore to leave 
the group and its network, at any time. 

Article  L.  231-6  of  the  Commercial  Code  is  applicable  to  open-ended  associations  and 
under  which  “each  member  may  withdraw  from  the  association  when  it  deems  it 
appropriate  unless  there  are  agreements  to  the  contrary”.  Consequently,  the  groups  of 
traders find themselves in a situation of structural fragility since their members can leave 

134 

 
 
 
 
 
Final Report 

Levelling the Playing Field 2.0 

the  network  at  any  time  and  accordingly  reduce  the  group’s  purchasing  power.  
Integrated distribution networks (where  all points of sale belong to the same  company) 
are not in the same situation of fragility.  Similarly, franchise-type contractual distribution 
networks,  which  are  made  up  of  independents,  are  also  not  in  the  same  situation  of 
fragility because the loss of shareholder/partner status breaks the contract, regardless of 
its duration, and the franchisor can seek to find a replacement franchisee. 

Validation of the mechanisms limiting the right of withdrawal 
In  order  to  reassure  their  suppliers  and  their  banks,  while  deploying  the  investment 
strategies  necessary  to  remain  competitive,  traders  within  the  same  group  generally 
agree  to  limit  their  own  right  of  withdrawal  by  committing  themselves  to  remain  a 
shareholder/partner  for  a  certain  duration.    When  exercising  their  right  of  withdrawal 
before this agreed deadline, they pay compensation. 

French  case  law  validates  this  mechanism  for  limiting  the  right  of  withdrawal  of  the 
shareholder  trader.    The  law  recognises  that  the  departure  of  a  trader  weakens  the 
capacity  of  the  group,  and  leaves  to  other  merchant  traders  to  cover  the  share  of  the 
expenses and the financing of the investments that the retiring or excluded trader will no 
longer assume, and from which it benefited. 

It  therefore  appears  normal  and  legitimate  that,  in order to  ensure  the sustainability  of 
the  group’s  membership,  the  group  should  set  up  compensatory  mechanisms,  namely 
that the trader who withdraws offsets the consequences of its premature departure and 
thus preserves the other traders from the consequences of this departure.  This principle 
emerges  clearly  through  case  law  (e.g.  Paris,  2  October  2008,  5th  Ch.B,  n  °  06/15.920; 
Versailles,  12  June  2001,  12th  Chamber  Section  1,  RG  n  °  99/03314;  Versailles,  12th 
Chamber 2nd Section, 27 March 1997, RG No. 5279/95; Reims, Civil Chamber, 1st Section, 
March 5, 2003, RG 98/1404; Versailles, 12th Chamber 2nd Section l, October 26, 1995, RG 
8143/94, 8865/94, 8916 / 94). 

In  addition,  there  are  other  complementary  mechanisms  also  recognised  by  case  law, 
such  as  the  right  of  priority  of  acquisition  by  the  grouping  of  shares  in  the  trader's 
association, which also helps provide stability and assurance of continuity for the groups. 

Legislation recognising the specific characteristics of the group distribution model 
Example 1: Ensuring that independent trader groups are not time-limited 
In  order  to  protect  certain  abuses  concerning  the  relations  between  the  franchisor  and 
the franchisee in a franchise agreement, and thus fight against the practices that prevent 
the franchisee from leaving the network, the legislator has set a rule of common expiry of 
franchising  contracts.  According  to  this  rule,  provided  for  in  Article  L.  341-1  of  the 
Commercial  Code  created  by  the  "Macron"  law  n  °  2015-990  of  6  August  2015,  all  the 
contracts  concluded  between  these  two  operators  provide  for  a  common  duration  for 
when  they  expire.    This  article  puts  an  end  to  the  practice,  denounced  by  the  French 
Competition  Authority,  for  franchise  contracts  whose  "cross-duration"  prevents  the 
termination  of  the  relationship,  with  intention  to  promote  competition  and  provide 
greater protection for franchisees, as perceived vulnerable parties. 

In contrast, in the context of independent trader groups, if the traders in a group have a 

135 

 
 
Final Report 

Levelling the Playing Field 2.0 

contractual  relationship  with  the  group,  they  benefit  from  the  group's  activities  only 
because  they  are  shareholders  or  members.    This  feature  of  shareholder  status  is  a 
specific characteristic of the group that, by its nature, reflects a relationship of indefinite 
duration.    For  this  reason,  any  such  contracts  concluded  between  the  group  and  its 
members are also of indefinite duration or tacitly renewed.   The legislator has taken into 
account  this  specific  characteristic  of  groups  of  independent  traders  by  excluding  the 
application  of  the  rule  of  common  expiry  of  the  "contract  of  association  and  the  civil, 
commercial or cooperative association contract" (C. com., L. 341 -1, paragraph 3). 

Example 2: Priority rights 
In order to overcome their structural fragility, the groupings generally include clauses in 
their  statutes  giving  them  a  right  of  priority  in  the  event  of  a  plan  to  sell  the  trader’s 
shares  or  business  assets.    The  group  can  thus  try  to  find  another  trader  who  will  take 
over the point of sale under the same banner (i.e. brand name), in the same network.  The 
legislator (law n ° 2014-856 of 31 July 2014), aware of the usefulness of such mechanisms 
for  the  durability  of  groups,  has  included  one,  for  example,  in  the  commercial  code 
specifically  for  groups  of  traders  who  have  the  form  of  cooperative  traders,  which  is  a 
dominant form of grouping of independent traders in France: 

Article L. 124-4-1 of the Commercial Code: 

“The  articles  of  a  cooperative  association  of  traders  may  provide  that  a  member  which 
wishes to sell its business, or more than 50% of the social shares or shares comprising the 
capital  of  the  association  holding  the  funds,  or  the  real  estate  in  which  the  funds  apply, 
must inform the cooperative. The cooperative has, from the receipt of this information, a 
period of three months to submit an offer of acquisition. 

Divestment in breach of the first paragraph may be annulled by the relevant court. 

If  the  divestment  has  not  taken  place  within  two  years,  the  transferor  shall  inform  the 
cooperative  who  may  submit  a  new  offer  under  the  conditions  provided  for  in  the  first 
paragraph. 

The  clause  referred  to  in  the  first  paragraph  is  waived  in  the  event  of  succession, 
termination of a marriage or transfer to a spouse, an ascendant or a descendant." 

(LOI n ° 2014-856 of July 31st, 2014 - art. 40) 

Source: Based on material supplied by the Fédération du Commerce Coopératif et Associé (FCA). 

C.5 

The extent to which groups can undertake activities on behalf of members is far from clear 

in  most  jurisdictions  within  the  EU.    Apart  from  EU  competition  law,  it  is  normally  only 

national case law that provides guidance on what practices independent retailer groups can 

undertake and how they should be organised.  This can be particular problem when there is 

no  established  case  law  when  retail  markets  are  changing  rapidly.    A  key  issue  relates  to 

online  selling,  where  the  options  for  independent  retailer  groups  are  between  having  a 

136 

 
 
 
 
 
Final Report 

Levelling the Playing Field 2.0 

centralised  online  sales  service,  with  supplies  handled  by  local  stores,  as  opposed  to  a 

decentralised system whereby individual stores operate their own websites.  The former has 

the  benefit  of  group  cohesion  and  consistency  in  representation  to  the  consumer  (e.g.  in 

providing  a  single  price  for  a  good),  while  the  latter  can  prove  to  be  a  confusing  picture 

where  there  might  be  multiple  prices  for  the  same  good.    To  pre-empt  this  problem,  the 

French  authorities  have  amended  their  national  Commercial  Code  to  allow  centralised 

online  retailing  through  developing  an  online  sales  platform.    This  is  shown  at  point  6  in 

boxed Exhibit C.4 on the permitted activities of retailer cooperatives in France according to 

the  Commercial  Code.    It  would  be  helpful  if  there  was  clarification  in  other  EU  member 

states as to what practices are permitted or not permitted for independent retailer groups 

because  uncertainty  will  delay  necessary  investments  and  consumers  may  suffer  as 

consequence from ineffective and inefficient services.  

Exhibit C.4 – French Commercial Code on retailer cooperatives’ permitted 
activities 

CHAPTER IV: COOPERATIVE ASSOCIATIONS OF RETAILERS  
Article L. 124-1 (Law n ° 2014-856 of July 31st, 2014 - art. 36, 37) 

Through  the  collective  efforts  of  their  members,  cooperative  associations  of  retailers  seek  to 
improve  the  conditions  in  which  they  conduct  their  business.  To  that  end,  they  may,  inter  alia, 
directly or indirectly engage in the following activities on behalf of their members:  

1° Supplying them with some or all of the goods, commodities, services, equipment and materials 
they need in order to conduct their business, inter alia, by establishing and maintaining stocks of all 
kinds  of  goods,  by  building,  purchasing,  or  leasing  and  managing  private  shops  and  warehouses, 
and  by  carrying  out  on  their  own  premises  or  those  of  their  members  any  appropriate  works, 
conversions or refurbishments;  

2° Bringing together on one site the businesses belonging to their members, creating and managing 
all  services  collectively  needed  to  operate  those  businesses,  building,  purchasing  or  renting  the 
buildings required for their activities or those of their members, and managing them, all as provided 
for in Chapter V of the present Title;  

3°  Within  the  framework  of  the  legislative  provisions  relating  to  financial  activities,  facilitating 
access by the members and their clients to the various financing and credit facilities available;  

3 ° (a) Organising financial cooperation between the members, in particular through the formation 
of  associations,  exercising  under  their  direct  or  indirect  control  with  the  purpose  of  providing  the 
necessary support for the purchase, creation and development of the business in accordance with 
the  provisions  of  credit  institutions.  The  capital  of  the  associations  thus  constituted  must  be 
majority owned by the cooperatives and cooperative members; non-cooperative members cannot 
in any case hold together more than 35% of the total voting rights. When the share of capital held 
by  non-cooperative  shareholders  exceeds  this  limit,  the  number  of  voting  rights  is  reduced  to  a 
proportionate amount;  

137 

 
 
 
Final Report 

Levelling the Playing Field 2.0 

4°  Carrying  out  activities  which  are  complementary  to  those  referred  to  above,  and,  inter  alia, 
providing  their  members  with  assistance  in  relation  to  technical,  financial  and  accounting 
management;  

5°  Purchasing  businesses  in  respect  of  which,  as  an  exception  to  Article  L.  144-3,  leasing-
management rights are granted to a member within two months and which must be re-conveyed 
within a maximum period of seven years. Failure to re-convey within this period may give rise to an 
injunction as set out in the second paragraph of Article L. 124-15;  

6° Drawing up and implementing a common commercial policy designed to ensure the development 
and activity of its members by any means, including:  

- 
- 
- 

- 

- 

the establishment of an appropriate legal structure;  
the provision of trademarks or brand names which they own or have the use of;  
the  carrying  out  of  commercial  operations  of  an  advertising  or  other  nature  which  may 
include common pricing; 
the  development  of  common  methods  and  models  for  purchasing,  stocking  and  presenting 
products, and for the architecture and organisation of the outlets;  
the development and management of an online sales platform; 

7°  Acquiring  shareholdings,  including  majority  interests,  in  directly  or  indirectly  associated 
companies running retail businesses. 

138 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Final Report 

Levelling the Playing Field 2.0 

APPENDIX D 

COMPETITION POLICY TOWARDS INDEPENDENT 
RETAILER GROUPS 

D.I. Overview 

D.1  This appendix summarises how existing competition policy in the EU applies to independent 

retailer  groups.    It  considers  the  treatment  of  mixed  structures  involving  horizontal  and 

vertical  agreements  (as  typically  characterising  independent  retailer  groups),  and  relevant 

market definition and critical market shares (in both procurement and retail markets).  The 

appendix also considers in detail the fundamental aspects relating to the economic purpose 

of  most  independent  retailer  groups,  namely  joint  purchasing  and  the  role  of  purchase 

obligations,  and  joint  commercialisation  and  the  role  of  retail  pricing  requirements.  The 

analysis  highlights  the  deficiencies  in  current  competition  policy  treatment  towards 

independent retailer groups in the new retail era where online sales play an ever increasing 

role.  

D.II. Current policy and legal frameworks 

D.2  The section begins by considering the impact of the joint presence of horizontal and vertical 

agreements  that  typically  characterise  independent  retailer  groups.    With  groups  using 

arrangements  that  have  horizontal (retailer to  retailer)  and vertical (central office to retail 

member) elements, then different assessments of EU competition law may follow since the 

rules and guidelines for clearing or exempting agreements differ between the two types of 

agreements.  Vertical agreements are generally considered less harmful to competition than 

horizontal  agreements  between  competitors.    Accordingly,  determining  the  appropriate 

interpretation  and  consequent  treatment  of  agreements  may  be  crucial  in  determining 

whether independent retailer groups can achieve appropriate efficiency benefits that serve 

to  protect  or  enhance  competition  in  the  relevant  markets  to  the  ultimate  benefit  of 

consumers.   

D.3  Given  the  role  of  market  shares  in  the  economic  assessment  of  horizontal  and  vertical 

agreements  and  the  importance  of  determining  whether  retailers  are competitors,  i.e.  act 

139 

 
 
 
 
 
Final Report 

Levelling the Playing Field 2.0 

on the same market(s), market definition of the relevant procurement and retail markets in 

which independent retailer groups operate is important.  Here, both the product/service and 

geographic  scope  of  these  markets  needs  careful  consideration.    In  general,  procurement 

markets  tend  to  be  treated  as  product-category  based  and  could  be  regional,  national  or 

international  in  scope.    Thus,  with  international  sourcing  on  the  rise  and  extensive  cross-

border  trade  occurring  within  Europe,  procurement  markets  might  for  many  products  be 

international.  In regard to retail markets these are generally treated as local in nature when 

conducted  from  physical  stores.  However,  with  online  sales  operations,  the  geographic 

scope of supply might widen the geographical scope of the market, potentially making them 

national  or  international  (e.g.  possibly  EU-wide),  but  this  will  depend  on  the  market 

circumstances.   

D.4  Two particular aspects of existing policy that directly impinge on the efficient operation and 

the ability of independent retailers to compete effectively in the new retail era; namely joint 

marketing/commercialisation  (with  the  need  for  control  over  retail  prices  for  brand 

uniformity  and  consistency)  and  joint  purchasing  (and  the  associated  use  of  purchasing 

obligations when product markets are deemed regional or national in scope).  Both aspects 

can  be  fundamental  to  the  efficient  operation  of  independent  retailer  groups.    However, 

both  aspects  may  receive  different  and  inconsistent  treatments  under  horizontal  and 

vertical agreement regulations, and there is a clear need for assessment to be fully on the 

economic effects of these arrangements  and not  simply  on an interpretation of their legal 

form.  

D.III. Policy approach towards mixed structures of agreements 

D.5  As  explained  in  Section  3,  independent  retailer  groups  by  the  very  nature  of  their 

collaboration  usually  represent  both  horizontal  and  vertical  agreements  within  an 

organisational context.  In legal and policy terms, this means that  the treatment  that such 

groups  receive  is  fundamentally  different  to  integrated  retailers  (where  all  internal 

arrangements,  functions and parts of the business  are controlled by ownership as a single 

entity  rather  than  contractual  arrangements  between  separate  legal  entities).  In  the 

traditional local retail markets where competition took place only between different physical 

store operations, independent retailer groups have been able to compete effectively based 

on their ability to adapt quickly to differences in local competition and demand. Even though 

they  have  always  been  constrained  by  EU  competition  law  as  compared  to  competing 

140 

 
 
 
Final Report 

Levelling the Playing Field 2.0 

integrated chain-store retailers,  the  disadvantages have  not  been impossible to overcome. 

Effective  business  models  have  been  possible  to  implement  not  withstanding  EU  law 

precluding independent retailer groups from using practices such as common pricing (insofar 

as  a  group  has  more  than  one  member  competing  in  a  local  retail market) or  resale  price 

maintenance (RPM), across their retail members. However, in the new retail environment of 

multichannel  retailing,  the  competition  policy  restrictions  within  the  EU  threaten  the 

independent retailer groups ability and agility to extend their physical store operations to an 

effective and fully coordinated omnichannel system. 

D.6 

In  regard  of  the  horizontal  nature  of  relations  with  independent  retailer  groups,  coming 

together  to  pool  their  purchasing,  typically  means  that  they  are  bound  by  horizontal 

agreements.44  However,  as  described  below,  the  central  body  responsible  for  purchases 

have in many cases developed into a separate entity with more of a vertical relationship to 

the retail members also as regards the supply of goods. 

D.7  Beyond  pooling  purchasing,  and  specifically  in  response  to  the  emergence  and  growth  of 

wholly  integrated  chain-store  groups,  independent  retailer  groups  moved  to  adopt 

structures  in  which  their  central  organisations  developed  to  make  purchases  at  their  own 

risk, offer to their members concepts of common brand names involving the organization of 

a genuine network of sales outlets, and develop and offer products under their own brands, 

common  marketing  concepts,  shared  training  programmes,  and  joint  communication 

policies. These aspects can be viewed as joint marketing and commercialisation, so again can 

be  viewed  to  have  horizontal  agreement  nature  (in  applying  across  different  retailers). 

However,  operationally  they  are  formalised  by  a  set  of  vertical  agreements  entered  into 

between  retail  members  and  central  organisations,  which  are  separate  entities  from  their 

members.45  

D.8  Thus  with  the  exception  of  some  groups  that  solely  relate  to  joint  purchasing  as  buying 

alliances,  most  independent  retailer  groups  are  governed  by  and  characterised  by  a  co-

existence of vertical and horizontal activities and agreements, thus have a “mixed structure”. 

44 See Commission Communication: Guidelines on the applicability of Article 101 of the Treaty on the 
Functioning of the European Union (TFEU) to horizontal co-operation agreements, O.J. 2011/C 11/01 
(14/1/2011).   
45  The  vertical  aspect  is  because  the  agreements  can  operate  at  different  stages  of  the  distribution 
chain.    See  Article  101(1)(a)  of  the  Block  Exemption  Regulation  (Commission  Regulation  (EU) 
No 330/2010 of 20 April 2010). 

141 

 
 
 
 
 
                                                      
Final Report 

Levelling the Playing Field 2.0 

Yet,  in  some  cases  the  separation  between  the  central  entity  and  the  horizontal  activities 

(i.e.  the  interaction  between  the  retail  members)  has  gone  so  far  that  the  relationship 

between the central entity and the retail members has become purely vertical. 

D.9  When  faced  with  mixed  situations,  the  European  Commission’s  Guidelines  on  horizontal 

agreements  and  Guidelines  on  vertical  restraints,  require  assessing  the  horizontal 

agreements  first.    If  this  assessment  leads  to  the  conclusion  that  these  agreements  are 

acceptable,  a  complementary  evaluation  must  then  be  carried  out  to  assess  the  group’s 

vertical agreements. 

D.10  This  sequence  in  performing  this  dual  examination  based  on  different  legal  texts  derives 

from  the  fact  that  the  Commission  considers  that  vertical  agreements  are  less  harmful  to 

competition  than  horizontal  agreements,  as  stated  in  the  Vertical  Restraints  Guidelines: 

“Vertical  restraints  are  generally  less  harmful  than  horizontal  restraints  and  may  provide 

substantial  scope  for  efficiencies”  (point  6).    This  is  also  manifest  by  the  different  market 

share  thresholds  used  in  exempting  agreements  –  typically  15%  in  the  case  of  horizontal 

agreements and 30% in the case of vertical agreements. 

D.11  However,  this  approach  can  lead  to  problems  in  misinterpreting  the  true  nature  of  an 

agreement and its effects on participants and subsequent market behaviour and outcomes. 

D.12  As a good case for illustration, consider the issue of retail prices.  If retailers were to reach 

agreements among themselves to sell a particular product at a particular price, this practice 

could be considered as illegal because it results from a horizontal agreement and deemed as 

anticompetitive “price fixing”.46  In contrast, if the central organisation of the same group, in 

the  context  of  the  group’s  brand  policy,  for  example,  requests  that  its  members  charge  a 

maximum selling price for certain products, it could be considered that such prices are legal 

under certain conditions. This is because they come under a vertical structure between the 

central organization and its members (principally when used to suppress prices and increase 

sales to the benefit of consumers).  In practice, the outcome of such arrangements may be 

46    While  this  is  generally  the  case  in  Europe,  there  may  be  exceptions  at  the  national  level.    For 
example,  in  France  where  Article  L.  124-1  Code  de  Commerce  provides  an  exception  in  particular 
circumstances to horizontal agreements to Article L. 420-1 Code de Commerce. 

142 

 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                      
Final Report 

Levelling the Playing Field 2.0 

exactly  the  same  –  i.e.  the  same  price  level  used  under  both  arrangements  by  all  retailer 

members – yet the legal treatment may be clearly very different.47 

D.13  The  principle  and  language  applied  by  the  Commission  is  that  “price  fixing”  is  inherently 

anticompetitive  in  horizontal  agreements  between  competitors  because  its  objective  is  to 

raise  price  and  reduce  value  to  final  consumers.48    In  contrast,  the  Commission  takes  the 

view that for a vertical agreement the purpose of fixing or capping prices may be to raise or 

lower price.  Specifically, there is recognition that setting maximum selling prices could avoid 

a double marginalisation problem (i.e. a succession of mark ups at the wholesale and retail 

level that  leads to  inefficiently  high  price  that  reduces  sales  and  profits  overall and  harms 

consumers).    There  is  also  recognition  that  even  fixing  prices  may  be  necessary  in  a 

distribution system applying a  uniform distribution format  to organise  a coordinated  short 

term 

low  price  campaign  to  benefit  consumers. 

  Nevertheless,  fixed  resale  price 

maintenance  (RPM)  is  treated  as  a  hardcore  restriction  and  so  falls  within  Article 101(1), 

where the presumption is that it is unlikely to fulfil the conditions of Article 101(3) and so 

the  block  exemption  does  not  apply,  leaving  undertakings  to  plead  an  efficiency  defence 

under Article 101(3) in an individual case. 

D.14  In  the  new  retail  era  with online  sales  becoming  an  important  sales  channel,  independent 

retailer groups face new challenges. While few of their members have been competitors in 

the local retail markets where they operate their physical stores, the situation is likely to be 

quite  different  as regards online  sales. Thus, the  restrictive  view  expressed in EC guidance 

47  The point here is that while there might be a view that independent retailers may wish to collude 
amongst themselves in order to agree on a high price and avoid intra-group competition, this might 
not necessarily be the case.  Just as with the justification for a vertical agreement involving maximum 
resale  prices  as  being  a  means  to  support  a  common  and  consistent  brand  image  (to  reassure 
consumers  about  the  value-for-money  proposition  offered  by  the  group’s  members),  a  horizontal 
agreement  could  have  exactly  the  same  intention  and  purpose  (i.e.  it  does  not  necessarily  have  to 
serve  against  consumers’  interests).    Indeed,  this  aspect  lies  behind  the  concept  of  “joint 
commercialisation”,  whereby  common  marketing  and  promotion  practices  used  within  an 
independent  retailer  group  may  be  interpreted  as  horizontal  agreements,  which  may  be  justifiable 
under Article 101(3).   
48  For example, consider the wording in the EC Horizontal Agreement Guidelines: “Price fixing is one 
of the major competition concerns arising from commercialisation agreements between competitors. 
Agreements  limited  to  joint  selling  generally  have  the  object  of  coordinating  the  pricing  policy  of 
competing  manufacturers  or  service  providers.  Such  agreements  may  not  only  eliminate  price 
competition  between  the  parties  on  substitute  products  but  may  also  restrict  the  total  volume  of 
products to be delivered by the parties within the framework of a system for allocating orders. Such 
agreements are therefore likely to restrict competition by object.” (point 234). 

143 

 
 
 
 
                                                      
Final Report 

Levelling the Playing Field 2.0 

papers  towards  horizontal  agreements  between  competitors  becomes  a  more  acute 

obstacle for the development of effective business models for  independent retailer groups 

in the new retail era than before.  

D.15  Thus, the greatest challenge is in respect of new modes of retailing, particularly in respect of 

Internet retailing and omnichannel retailing.  In these forms of retailing, where consumers 

are  not  limited  to  specific  stores  in  a  given  locality,  but  can  buy  goods  nationally  or  even 

internationally then the interpretation of EU competition law will determine if and to what 

extent independent retailer groups will be able to compete effectively with their integrated 

competitors.    In  particular,  fixed  prices  can  be  required  to  sustain  new  modes  of  retailing 

and service  provision that have  clear consumer benefits.   For example, “bricks-and-clicks” 

(i.e. internet-cum-store) retailing has attractions for consumers, who can search for products 

on-line (through a “centralised site” managed by the central office) then pay for them and 

pick up them up from a contracted store of their choice (typically the one closest to where 

they live or work).   In such a setting, for the  system to work  effectively, contracted stores 

may  have  to  give  undertakings  to  provide  consumers  with  the  goods  at  their  advertised 

prices (otherwise there would be scope for opportunistic behaviour on the part of retailers 

that would undermine the reputation and efficiency of the whole operation, with a resulting 

loss of trade).   

D.16  This problem is recognised in part by the example given in the EC Horizontal Guidelines (at 

point  254)  regarding  establishing  a  joint  internet  platform.  However,  the  issue  on  online 

retailing has far wider ramifications for independent retailer groups, where their continuing 

existence  may  depend  on  how  quickly  and  effectively  they  can  respond  to  the  online 

operations  of  integrated  retailers  and  the  implementation  of  new  trading  and  retailing 

systems to respond to customers’ needs and preferences.  Unfortunately, as the survey of 

independent  retailer  groups  highlighted,  reported  in  Section  4  and  Appendix  B,  current 

competition  policy  and  legal  restrictions  on  applying  fixed  prices  and  coordinating  central 

online  sales  operations  through 

joint  commercialisation  are  severely  hampering 

independent  retailer  groups.    This  is  a  matter  that  policymakers  urgently  need  to  address 

before competition is permanently damaged. 

D.17  The  question  of  determination  of  the  appropriate  interpretation  and  application  of  the 

relevant law in the new retail era is therefore clearly important.   

144 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Final Report 

Levelling the Playing Field 2.0 

D.18  Moreover,  uniform  application  throughout  Europe  is  crucial.    Today,  national  competition 

authorities or courts could, despite the European Commission definition of and guidelines on 

vertical  and  horizontal  agreements,  consider  a  central  organisation  of  a  group  which  has 

wholesale  activities  as  not  having  vertical  agreements  with  its  retailer  members  if  these 

members were at the same time customers and owners of the central organisation.  

D.19  Clearly, from the perspective of allowing independent retailer groups to operate efficiently 

in  the  new  retail  era  and  not  be  handicapped  or  unduly  discriminated  against,  it  is 

fundamentally  important  that  those  uncertainties  in  legal  interpretations  are  removed.  

Specifically, it is necessary to ensure that 

  First, it is possible to differentiate the economic effects in each analysis, and that any 

suspicion  of  an  illegal  agreement  of  the  horizontal  type  should  be  ruled  out  when  a 

vertical  agreement  would  serve  exactly  the  same  pro-efficiency,  pro-competitive 

purpose (not least as this prejudices the examination of the vertical aspects from the 

outset); 

  Second, an examination of the horizontal aspects does not lead to a ban on behaviour 

that is allowed in the context of vertical agreements; 

  Third, exchanges of information (and data sharing), for example, between members to 

improve  the  responsiveness  of  retailers  to  competition  should  not  necessarily  be 

considered as an anti-competitive horizontal behaviour when the primary aim of such 

exchanges  is  to  enhance  the  overall  efficiency  and  competitive  ability  of  the  group 

through improved co-ordination between the central office and individual members or 

amongst the members directly. Specifically, this is likely to enhance competition with 

other  retail  groups  and  networks,  not  least  as  this  typically  entails  improving  supply 

responsiveness and improved stocking and product selection for the direct benefit of 

consumers.  

D.IV. Relevant market definition and critical market shares  

D.20  In  the  “economics  effects”  approach  used  in  assessing  horizontal  and  vertical  agreements 

under Article 101, market share is used as a proxy measure of market power or its absence. 

Specifically,  below  certain  critical  market  share  levels,  the  presumption  is  that  (in  the 

absence  of  parallel  effects)  parties  will  possess  insufficient  market  power  for  their 

agreements to have a material detrimental effect on market outcomes.  The definition of the 

145 

 
 
 
 
 
Final Report 

Levelling the Playing Field 2.0 

relevant product and geographic markets affected by an agreement  is therefore important 

for the assessment of the activities of any retailer grouping.  However, it should be stressed 

that  such  presumption  merely  provides  for  a  safe  harbour  for  agreements  concluded  by 

undertakings  with  relatively  low  market  shares.  If  the  threshold  is  exceeded  this  does  not 

automatically mean that there  is detrimental effect  on the market; it only means that the 

shorthand route to exclude such effects does not apply and that a qualitative analysis must 

be  made.  The  market  definition  will  also  determine  whether  the  retailers  are  (actual  or 

potential)  competitors  on  the  relevant  product  and  geographic  markets,  which  is  another 

important factor for the assessment under Article 101.   

D.21  Following  a  good  number  of  retail  sector  merger  cases  in  the  past  few  years,  some  clear 

patterns  have  emerged  as  to  how  competition  authorities  view  procurement  and  retail 

markets. Even if market definitions in merger cases are not directly transposable to Article 

101 cases (given the different context in which they apply), they could still, to some extent, 

provide  guidance  on  how  the  competition  authorities  would  define  relevant  markets  in 

Article 101 cases. 

Procurement market definition 

D.22  At  the  procurement  level,  where  retailers  or  groups  of  retailers  purchase  products,  either 

directly  or  through  a  wholesale  operation,  competition  authorities  generally  consider  that 

each different kind of product or group of products constitutes a separate product market. 

D.23  Furthermore,  due  to  the  similar  market  coverage  and  reach  of  producers  and  distribution 

channels, as well as price negotiations with suppliers generally taking place at the national 

level,  the  geographic  scope  of  these  markets  is  mostly  national  within  the  EU  (although 

regional  variations  may  exist  within  individual  member  states).    However,  the  European 

Commission  has  observed  that  where  purchase  conditions  are  centrally  negotiated  with 

suppliers  across  national  borders,  the  relevant  geographic  market  may  be  wider  (e.g. 

covering  a  number  of  adjacent  member  states).    Indeed,  geographic  expansion  of  the 

relevant market, even up to the level of the entire EU or European continent, is a possibility 

as  retailing  internationalises  with  cross-border  procurement  (e.g.  with  pan-European 

purchasing alliances, such as European Marketing Distribution (EMD), Associated Marketing 

Services (AMS), Coopernic, AgeCore, and Eurauchan). 

146 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Final Report 

Levelling the Playing Field 2.0 

D.24  In  summary,  the market  share  of  a  purchaser  group  at the  procurement  level is  the  share 

that the combined purchases of the relevant product represent out of the total purchases of 

the  relevant  product  in  the  relevant  geographic  market  (i.e.  whether  national  or  multi-

national depending on the extent of cross-border sourcing and distribution activity).   

Retail market definition 

D.25  At  the  selling  level,  the  European  Commission  and  national  authorities  have  generally 

distinguished between an overall retail market for “daily consumer goods” (or “groceries”) 

and narrower product markets where specialised retailers are concerned. 

D.26  The retail market for daily consumer goods in respect of the product dimension comprises 

the entire range of food and non-food products for daily consumer household needs that is 

normally  offered  at  retail  level  (e.g.  food,  drink,  pet  food,  household  goods,  and  cleaning 

products) and sold through grocery stores where consumers are buying a basket of goods.49   

D.27  The European Commission  has in merger situations  considered  breaking down this market 

definition  by  size  of  the  sales  outlet  when  there  are  different  purchasing  patterns  by 

consumers in the competitor set.50  However, boundaries may be blurred when consumers 

use  a  repertoire  of  different  store  sizes  to  make  their  purchases,  so  in  effect  they  are  all 

competing  for  a  share  of  the  consumer’s  wallet/purse  and  thus  it  has  become  difficult  to 

make clear-cut distinctions as to whether different sizes or types of outlets are in or outside 

the same close competitor set.  This aspect has become more pertinent with the growth of 

online  sales  operations  as  competitors  to  physical  stores  and  the  spread  of  limited 

assortment discounter stores to compete with full-range mainstream stores, as well as the 

resurgence  of  convenience  stores  to  compete  with  supermarkets  (as  shoppers  move  to 

make more frequent shopping trips but purchase smaller baskets).51 A further complication 

is that there may be asymmetric substitutability by consumers shopping for their basket size 

49  See cases M.784  – Kesko /  Tuko, M.1221 Rewe / Meinl, M.7933 – Carrefour / Billa  Romania  and 
Billa  Invest  Construct;  see  also  case  M.2951  –  A.S.  Watson  /  Kruidvat  relating  to  the  retail  sale  of 
health and beauty products. 
50 See cases M.1221 – Rewe / Meinl and M.7345 – Carrefour / 53 Magasins de Billa en Italie. 
51 For a national perspective, see the analysis and review of UK retail merger cases by the Competition 
(CMA),  Retail  Mergers  Commentary,  CMA62,  10  April  2017 
and  Markets  Authority 
(https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/607524/retail-
mergers-commentary.pdf). 

147 

 
 
 
 
 
                                                      
Final Report 

Levelling the Playing Field 2.0 

needs, so that, for example, hypermarkets might be viewed as substitutes for supermarkets, 

but not vice versa.52 

D.28  As  regards  the  relevant  geographic  market,  the  European  Commission  has  considered  the 

catchment area of a retail outlet as the critical factor, using a radius of between 10 and 30 

minutes driving time to and from the outlet (depending on the context, e.g. less in densely 

populated urban areas, and more in less densely populated rural areas).53  This suggests that 

the  relevant  geographic market  is  a  regional  or  local  one.    In this  case,  it may be  possible 

that only one retailer belonging to a given independent retailer group may be established in 

a  relevant  geographic  market,  so  that  there  would  be  no  competition  between  the 

independent retailers of the same group in respect of retail markets. 

D.29  The European Commission and national competition authorities have also found in merger 

situations that where retailers negotiate and purchase goods in a centralised way at national 

level  and  decide  on  consumer  prices,  product  promotion  and  advertising  campaigns  at 

national  level,  the  relevant  geographic  market  may  have  a  national,  rather  than  local, 

dimension.54     

D.30  In  the  case  of  specialised  retailers,  the  European  Commission  has  established  narrower 

product  market  definitions  according  to  the  products  or  group  of  products  concerned.55  

From a geographic point of view, these product markets can be considered to be national in 

scope when the range of products, image, store layout, service level, marketing and prices 

are  decided  and  advertised  by  the  market  players  on  a  national  level.56    However,  the 

geographic  scope  may  be  taken  as  local  if there  is  evidence  of  local-based  policies  (e.g.  in 

respect  of  pricing,  product  ranges  determined  according  to  local  tastes,  and  extensive 

independent  retailers).    Nevertheless,  the  choice  facing  consumers  of  online  or  offline 

retailing significantly complicates defining the geographic scope of retail markets.  

52  For  example,  asymmetric  substitutability  issues  has  been  considered  in  France  and  the  UK.    See 
respectively FCA, Opinion no 12-A-01 of 11 January 2012 (relating to the competitive situation in the 
food distribution sector in Paris, para 81); and Competition Commission, A report on the acquisition by 
Somerfield plc of 115 stores from Wm Morrison Supermarkets plc, September 2005.  
53 See case M.1684 – Carrefour / Promodes. 
54 See cases M.1221 – Rewe / Meinl; M.1684 – Carrefour / Promodes; M.1612 - Wal-Mart / ASDA. 
55  See  cases  M.1221  –  Rewe/Meinl,  M.3464  –  Kesko/ICA/JV,  and  M.7336  –  Carrefour  France/Dia 
France. 
56 See case M.2951 - A.S. Watson / Kruidvat.  

148 

 
 
 
 
 
                                                      
Final Report 

Levelling the Playing Field 2.0 

Issues arising for independent retailer groups 

D.31  For  independent  retailers,  and  prior  to  the  development  of  online  and  omnichannel 

retailing,  the  relevant  retail  market  would  likely  have  been  regional  or  local  in  nature  (in 

relation  to  the  relevant  catchment  area  of  retail  outlets).    This  follows  in  the  context  of 

physical-store  retailing  since,  even  though  there  might  be  a  central  office  setting  out 

marketing  policy,  decisions  could  be  made  in  respect  of  the  key  marketing  and  store 

operation  variables  at  the  local  level  (such  as  over  prices,  promotions,  product  range, 

category  depth,  staffing,  etc.).  This  applies  to  both  retailers  of  daily  consumer  goods 

(supermarkets) and for specialised consumer goods retailers. 

D.32  In this pre-online retailing age, retail outlets located outside a given geographic area would 

not  constitute  effective  alternative  sources  of  supply  for  retail  customers.  This  is  because 

these customers would and could not, “in the short term and at a negligible cost”,57 switch 

to outlets located elsewhere “in response to a hypothetical small (in the range 5% to 10%) 

but  permanent  relative  price  increase”58  occurring  in  the  retail  outlets  within  the  relevant 

catchment area.  For the purchase of consumer goods (especially of daily household goods) 

and in the absence of an online retailing option with home delivery, consumers would not 

drive beyond a certain distance from their home even in the case of a small but permanent 

increase in prices at their local retail store (as economic search costs begin to outweigh any 

shopping-around benefit of finding lower prices).  In such instances, in the event of a small 

but  significant  non-transitory  price  increase  in  a  given  local  market,  the  consumer  would 

most likely rather switch to another type and/or the same type of retail store in the same 

local  market.    Accordingly,  for  the  purpose  of  the  relevant  product  market  definition,  a 

breakdown between different types of retailers may not generally be justified, unless there 

is a very clear difference in respect of consumer behaviour as to where and on what basis 

shopping trips are undertaken.59 

57  European Commission Notice on the definition of the relevant market, OJ (1997) C 372/5, point 29. 
58  Id., at point 17. 
59    For  example,  the  UK  authorities  have  moved  away  from  distinguishing  the  retail  grocery  market 
between “one-stop shopping” and “secondary shopping” on the basis that these do not separate out 
retailers (e.g. a large store would likely be operating in both markets if both types of shoppers visited 
the  store),  and  critical  store  size  differences  may  appear  arbitrary  when  there  is  a  spectrum  of 
shopping  habits  rather  than  a  dichotomous  type  of  behaviour  (i.e.  either  one-stop  or  secondary 
shopping  on  a  specific  shopping  trip).    Nevertheless,  store  size  and  store  type  differences  may  be 
important to consumers, and that is an aspect that can be examined through careful shopping pattern 

149 

 
 
 
 
                                                      
Final Report 

Levelling the Playing Field 2.0 

D.33  Nevertheless, this is all predicated on consumers being geographically constrained in where 

they purchase goods, which becomes less clear in the presence of online retailing.  If retail 

markets can be taken to be regional or local in nature, then the important implication which 

follows  is  that  the  retailers  belonging  to  a  given  group  may  not  be  competitors  on  the 

relevant  selling markets.  This would have  permitted a favourable assessment in respect of 

their joint  commercialisation and other co-operative activities  relevant to their association 

or  group.  However,  with  increasing  online  sales,  retailers  that  previously  were  not 

competitors on the same local retail market, could become competitors due to the fact that 

the  geographical  market  becomes  wider.    This  raises  the  concern  for  independent  retailer 

groups that the legal status of their existing activities could change with the emergence of 

online  retailing,  ironically  because  of  the  greater  scope  for  competition  with  the  perverse 

consequence  that  previously  legal  activities  could  be  jeopardised  by  the  market  widening 

with more competitors present.  In this regard, it is vital that independent retailer groups are 

provided  with 

legal  certainty  over  their 

joint  commercialisation  and  cooperative 

arrangements to ensure that they are not dissuaded, to the detriment of consumers, from 

developing  online  retailing  which  risks  altering  market  definition  in  a  way  that  could 

undermine the assurances they have over the legality of their existing arrangements. 

D.V.  Joint purchasing and non-compete obligations 

Joint purchasing arrangements as horizontal agreements 

D.34  As  a  starting  point,  joint  purchasing  in  the  context  of  independent  retailer  groups  is  a 

horizontal  agreement  between  retail members,  even  though  a  (vertically)  separate central 

office  or  wholesale  arm  may  actually  conduct  negotiations  and  handle 

logistical 

arrangements  with  producers.60    The  economic  benefits  of  such  an  arrangement  for  retail 

members in securing more favourable terms from suppliers (compared to them negotiating 

separately) are recognised under EU law.   

and  expenditure  analysis.    For  examples,  see  Competition  and  Markets  Authority  (CMA),  Retail 
Mergers Commentary, CMA62, 10 April 2017.   
60  Even though joint buying may be viewed as first and foremost a horizontal agreement, the precise 
relationship may have a strong vertical element when it involves purchasing obligations – which are 
normally  treated  in  the  framework  of  vertical  agreements,  e.g.  the  treatment  of  non-compete 
obligations in the EC’s regulations and guidance on vertical restraints. 

150 

 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                        
Final Report 

Levelling the Playing Field 2.0 

D.35  In general, as long as buyer power is not created in a way that might distort competition in 

procurement markets and subsequently in retail markets, and that consumer benefits (e.g. 

lower prices) can be expected to flow from the arrangement, then such arrangements may 

be  looked  upon  favourably  by  competition  authorities.    For  example,  joint  purchasing  by 

small  and  medium  size  companies  may  be  vital  in  allowing  them  to  compete  with  larger 

companies on an effective basis. 

D.36  When the combined market share of the group is low then such arrangements will normally 

be permitted under the de-minimis notice (in the absence of any hardcore restrictions, like 

retail price fixing).  More directly, the EC’s Horizontal Guidelines on joint purchasing make it 

clear  that  Article  101(1)  is  unlikely  to  apply  where  the  retailers  have  a  combined  market 

share  of  below  15%  on  each  the  relevant  procurement  markets  and  the  relevant  retail 

markets.  In any event, if these market share thresholds are not exceeded, the conditions of 

Article 101(3) are likely to be fulfilled and the practice allowed.61 

D.37  Higher market shares may still justify an exemption.  This is particularly so if the agreement 

does not confer significant buying power for the group relative to rival retail organisations, 

as then joint purchasing is unlikely to restrict competition in retail markets.  However, where 

the  parties  have  buying  power  (i.e.  a  significant  share  of  the  relevant  purchasing  market), 

they may be in a position to drive down purchase prices below a competitive level so that 

competing  buyers  may  be  foreclosed  or  will  be  charged  higher  purchase  prices  to 

compensate  the  low  prices  negotiated  by  the  strong  buyers.    This  may  hamper  these 

competitors’ cost positions on the selling market and therefore restrict competition on the 

selling market.62 The condition for a restriction of competition on the selling market through 

a purchasing cooperation is thus the creation of market-distorting buying power.  Therefore, 

where  joint  purchasing does  not  create  such  buying power, it will not  restrict competition 

neither on the purchasing nor retail market, and thus may fall outside Article 101(1).63 

61  EC Horizontal Guidelines, point 208. 
62  EC Horizontal Guidelines, point 210. 
63    See  Example  1,  EC  Horizontal  Guidelines,  point  221,  which  provides  an  illustration  of  a  joint 
purchasing agreement would be permitted.  However, the example does not show where the market 
share boundaries lie and where restrictive effects on competition within the meaning of Article 101(1) 
would be such that the purchasing agreement is unlikely to fulfil the criteria of Article 101(3). 

151 

 
 
 
 
 
                                                      
Final Report 

Levelling the Playing Field 2.0 

D.38  In  respect  of 

justifying 

joint  purchasing,  assessment  under  Article  101(3) 

involves 

consideration  of  the  four  cumulative  conditions  in  that  the  agreement  must:  (i)  lead  to 

efficiency gains; (ii) be indispensable to achieve those gains; (iii) allow consumers to receive 

a share of those gains; and (iv) not eliminate competition in respect of a substantial part of 

the  products  in  question.    In  this  regard,  the  primary  justification  for  joint  purchasing  by 

groupings  of  independent  retailers  under  Article  101(3)  would  normally  be  that  the 

efficiencies achieved by joint purchasing (economies of scale in ordering and transportation 

and  a  stronger  negotiating  position  through  bundled  purchases)  are  necessary  in  order  to 

enable the parties to compete with the large (integrated) retail groups and thus to maintain 

competition on the selling market, which is clearly to the benefit of consumers. 

D.39  In  a  similar  vein,  it  may  be  argued  that  additional  obligations  are  indispensable.    Most 

notably,  an  obligation  to  buy  exclusively  through  the  cooperation  can  in  certain  cases  be 

indispensable  to  achieve  the  necessary  volume  for the  realisation of economies  of  scale.64  

This might, for example, apply in cases where larger (integrated) retail groups are active on 

the  relevant  markets.    In  these  circumstances,  since  these  groups  have  significantly  larger 

purchasing shares in the relevant purchasing market than the independent retailers, a total 

purchasing obligation on the retailers may be viewed as indispensable in order to bundle the 

necessary  volume  and  to  enable  the  independent  retailers  to  compete  in  the  purchase  of 

products.  The presence of larger, more powerful retail groups on the selling market can be 

expected to play an important role here since they will also ensure that the retailer group 

pass on the economies to the consumers through lower prices in competing with the large 

retailers.   

Non-compete obligations as vertical agreements 

D.40  Viewed  in  the  vertical  context  of  a  central  office  serving  retail  members,  purchasing 

obligations  may  clearly  play  a  crucial  role  in  the  effectiveness  of  the  joint  purchasing 

function of an independent retailer group.  Such obligations ensure that retail members will 

take the goods that the central office (or wholesale arm) manages to source from producers, 

which in turn provides bargaining leverage (through guaranteed access to outlets and large 

sales  volumes)  that  enables  favourable  terms  to  be  negotiated  with  producers  to  the 

collective benefit of retail members, and in turn consumers when these benefits are passed 

on in the form of lower retail prices and/or better products.   

64  EC Horizontal Guidelines, point 218. 

152 

 
 
 
 
                                                      
Final Report 

Levelling the Playing Field 2.0 

D.41  In  this  vertical  context,  purchasing  obligations  are  treated  as  non-compete  clauses  in  the 

vertical block exemption regulation.  The obligation to purchase all or more than 80% of the 

buyer’s  requirements  from  the  central  office,  are  covered  by  the  block  exemption65  for  a 

duration of up to 5 years if no individual retailer who is member of the retailer group has a 

total  annual  turnover  exceeding  €50  million  and  the  market  share  of  the  supplier  (central 

office) does not exceed 30% of the relevant selling market.66 

D.42  There  are  two  qualifications  to  this  general  rule  that  may  be  specifically  applicable  to 

independent retailer groups: 

  First,  if  the  premises  from  which  the  retailer  sells  the  products  are  owned  by  the 

supplier or leased by the supplier from third parties, the non-compete obligation can 

exist for as long as the buyer occupies these premises. 

  Second, the  EC’s Guidelines  on Vertical Restraints  states that restrictions (such as a 

non-compete  obligation)  imposed  by  an  association  of  retailers  in  which  only  a 

limited number of the members have a total annual turnover exceeding €50 million, 

and  where  these  members  together  represent  less  than  15 %  of  the  collective 

turnover  of  all  the  members  combined,  will  in  principle  also  be  exempted  under 

Article 101(3).67 

D.43  Where  the  above-mentioned  turnover  or  market  share  threshold  is  exceeded,  the  block 

exemption does not apply and the non-compete obligation has to be assessed under Article 

101 in accordance with the Vertical Guidelines. 

D.44  In general, a non-compete obligation is unlikely to have restrictive effects falling within the 

scope of Article 101(1) (or at least would be exempt under Article 101(3)) where the supplier 

(the  central  office)  has  an  insignificant  market  share  and  where  there  are  numerous  and 

strong  competitors.  It  is  only  likely  that  competing  suppliers  will  be  foreclosed  if  they  are 

significantly smaller than the supplier applying the non-compete obligation.68  Accordingly, 

65  Commission Regulation (EU) No 330/2010 of 20 April 2010 on the application of Article 101(3) of 
the  Treaty  on  the  Functioning  of  the  European  Union  to  categories  of  vertical  agreements  and 
concerted practices. Hereafter referred to as the Block Exemption Regulation. 
66 EC Guidelines on Vertical Restraints, O.J. 2010/C 130/0, points 29 and 131. 
67  EC Guidelines on Vertical Restraints, point 29. 
68  EC Guidelines on Vertical Restraints, points 134 and 141. 

153 

 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                      
Final Report 

Levelling the Playing Field 2.0 

and in the context of independent retailer groups, if competing integrated retail groups hold 

strong  market  positions  then  it  is  unlikely  that  a  non-compete  obligation  imposed  by  a 

central  office  on  its  members  will  foreclose  these  competitors’  access  to  the  distribution 

market. 

D.VI. Joint commercialisation and retail pricing requirements 

D.45  The  pressures  of  increased  competition  and  a  recognition  of  the  need  to  cater  better  for 

consumers  needs  have  meant  that many  independent  retailer  group  have  moved  on  from 

simply  providing their members with better purchasing conditions  as a joint buying group.  

Today,  the  objective  pursued  by  such  groups  is  often  considerably  broader.    They  are 

typically  designed  to  bring  the  associated  retailers  (and,  where  appropriate,  craftsmen  as 

well)  the  technical  and  material  resources  in  the  field  of  marketing  and  the  know-how  to 

contend with competition and develop efficient retail and distribution businesses.  By doing 

so,  they  facilitate  retail  members  being  better  able  to  respond  effectively  to  the 

expectations  of  consumers  by  providing  for  a  more  consistent  retail  image  and  a  more 

assured value-for-money proposition. This has become more important in the new retail era 

where online sales play a crucial role. 

D.46  In  order  to  support  such  activity,  and  ensure  that  consumers  benefit  from  such 

developments,  independent  retailer  groups  will  look  to  using  two  particular  practices 

relating  to  requirements  on  retail  pricing.      The  first  of  these  is  the  obligation  on  retail 

members not to price specified goods above a certain price level – i.e. a price cap through a 

maximum  resale  price  obligation  –  for  the  purpose  of  ensuring  that  retail  prices  are 

sufficiently  low  to  drive  sales  volumes  for  the  benefit  of  the  group  (by  increasing  total 

revenues) and consumers (by ensuring that they receive low prices).  The second of these is 

the  obligation  for  retail  members  to  stick  to  a  fixed  common  retail  price  on  certain 

promotional  goods  that  are  intrinsic  to  the  joint  marketing  and  overall  retail  image  being 

developed by the group and which provide assurance for all consumers that they will enjoy 

the  same  value-for-money  offer  irrespective  of  their  location  and  place  of  purchase  (i.e. 

providing  clarity  about  the  offer  and  assisting  in  consumers  making  more  informed 

purchasing  decisions  when  contrasting  the  group’s  offer  with  that  offered  by  other  retail 

groups active in the same market).   

154 

 
 
 
 
 
Final Report 

Levelling the Playing Field 2.0 

D.47  Both of these types of obligations can be seen as being pro-efficiency and pro-competitive in 

nature.  They may also offer significant consumer protection benefits (e.g. by ensuring that 

advertised promotions do not mislead or falsely inform consumers as to the prices that will 

find on visiting stores).  However, present policy regulations may restrict or even prohibit in 

their  use  depending  on  how  competition  authorities  interpret  these  obligations,  which  in 

turn may depend on whether they are viewed as horizontal or vertical agreements.   

D.48  The importance of this matter cannot be underestimated for independent retailer groups to 

function  well  and  be  an  effective  pro-competitive  force  in  the  new  retail  era.    Pricing 

strategy  is  perhaps  the  single  most  important  element  in  the  means  by  which  retailers 

compete  against  each  other  for  the  patronage  of  consumers.    It  is  crucial  for  a  group  of 

retailers to be competitive on prices that are indicative of the overall value-for-money offer 

being  presented  to  consumers.    This  is  most  apparent  in  respect  of  the  prices  used  in 

advertising  campaigns  (which  reflect  the  overall  group  image),  prices  on  products  in  the 

stores’  basic  assortment  (which  often  drive  stores’  footfall  by  influencing  which  stores 

shoppers will choose to visit), and the price for private labels (as these directly relate to the 

group’s image, brand positioning and point of distinction from the products offered by rival 

groups).    In  such  areas,  it  may  be  imperative  for  groups  to  be  able  to  exercise  suitable 

control  over  retail  pricing  if  they  are  to  be  truly  effective  retail  operators  and  provide 

consumers with the maximum level of benefits that can be achieved through consistent low 

prices. 

Maximum resale price obligations 

D.49  Trading agreements  help formally separate parties avoid sub-optimal outcomes in relation 

to their supply and distribution arrangements.  These arise from individual behaviour that, 

while being individually rational and profitable, is not in the joint (i.e. collective) interests of 

the parties.  Such a problem can arise with separate decisions over pricing which result  in 

retail  prices  being  set  “too”  high  from  a  joint  perspective  (i.e.  the  double  marginalisation 

problem of successive mark ups).  This is a problem for independent retailer groups when an 

individual retail member chooses to set prices higher than the group as a whole would like 

because this allows that retailer to capture additional profits (say, by exploiting some local 

market  power)  but  as  a  consequence  this  reduces  the  volume  of  sales,  which  impacts 

detrimentally on the wholesale arm (which by implication loses income for a given wholesale 

price).  In these circumstances, in order to prevent this individual retailer, and others like it, 

155 

 
 
 
 
Final Report 

Levelling the Playing Field 2.0 

from acting in this way, the  group and consumers collectively benefit from  the exercise of 

vertical control.  

D.50  This,  in  a  nutshell,  explains  why  independent  retailer  groups  will  seek  to  use  maximum 

resale price obligations.  Imposed retail price ceilings will ensure that individual members do 

not undermine the collective efficiency position of the group by raising their own prices but 

in the process leading to underselling and reduced group revenue as a consequence.  This is 

also  in  the  interests  of  consumers  by  ensuring  that  they  receive  low  prices  and  are  not 

exploited in areas where individual retailers could otherwise exploit local market power. 

D.51  In recognition of this need for vertical control, EU policy allows this practice to benefit from 

the  Block  Exemption  Regulation  on  Vertical  Agreements  when  it  is  applied  to  retailers  (or 

equivalently their vertically-linked wholesale operation) whose collective market share does 

not exceed 30% of the relevant market being supplied, so long as this does not directly or 

indirectly lead to fixed or minimum resale prices. 

D.52  Usually this practice does not pose any competition law concern, even if the market share of 

the  vertical  central  unit exceeds  the  30%  threshold, so  long  as  the  purpose  is designed  to 

prevent increases in the group’s retail prices.  Then, by setting maximum prices, the central 

unit of the group can help ensure a reasonable price level and thus benefits are transferred 

to consumers in the form of lower prices.   

D.53  Indeed, in cases where there are very high market share levels in retail markets, the practice 

may  be  a  very  useful  way  of  preventing  individual  retailer  members  from  exploiting  local 

market power, i.e. when local competition is absent or weak (e.g. in remote rural areas or 

socially  deprived  urban  areas,  especially  as  low-income  consumers  in  these  areas  may  be 

particularly harmed by high prices). 

Common retail prices for promotional purposes 

D.54  While  retail  price  ceilings  may  prove  to  be  an  important  and  useful  element  in  vertical 

control  to  ensure  that  efficiency  benefits  (arising  from  high  sales  volumes  and  combined 

revenues) are realised by the group and that these are shared with consumers (when these 

leads to lower retail prices), setting fixed prices may be more to do with horizontal control. 

156 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Final Report 

Levelling the Playing Field 2.0 

D.55  Fixed resale price maintenance is per se prohibited under EU law, as a hardcore restriction, 

and does not benefit from an exemption at any market share level.  The reason for this strict 

treatment is that while the practice can offer benefits (like curbing retail prices or tackling 

free-rider problems resulting in diminished retail service levels), it is generally not viewed as 

being “indispensable”.  In other words, competition authorities take the view that there will 

be other vertical restraints available than can serve the same benefits but be less restrictive 

on  competition.    Thus,  for  example,  competition  authorities  might  prefer  to  see  price 

ceilings used rather than fixed prices to prevent the problem of successive mark ups arising.  

Similarly,  competition  authorities  may  prefer  to  see  the  use  of  retail  service  obligations 

being  used  as  a  direct  way  to  control  free-rider  problems  in  retail  service  provision rather 

than the more indirect way of controlling the problem with fixed resale prices.   

D.56  Nevertheless, this stance against fixed and minimum RPM has softened in recent years, as 

evidence  from  the  changed  wording  in  the  latest  2010  Guidelines  on  Vertical  Restraints 

compared to the previously issued Guidelines in 2000.69  In particular, the 2010 Guidelines 

recognise that fixed resale prices, and not just maximum resale prices, may be necessary to 

organise in a franchise system or similar distribution system applying a uniform distribution 

format a coordinated short-term low price campaign (suggested as  2 to 6 weeks  duration) 

which  will  also  benefit  the  consumers.    The  2010  Guidelines  also  recognise  that  the  extra 

margin  provided  by  RPM  may  allow  retailers  to  provide  (additional)  pre-sales  services,  in 

particular in case of experience or complex products. The risk in these circumstances is that, 

in  the  absence  of  RPM,  if  enough  customers  take  advantage  from  such  services  to  make 

their  choice  but  then  purchase  at  a  lower  price  with  retailers  that  do  not  provide  such 

services (and hence do not incur these costs), high-service retailers may reduce or eliminate 

these services that enhance the demand for the supplier's product.  Here, RPM may help to 

prevent such free-riding at the distribution level.  Nevertheless, the onus on the parties is to 

demonstrate convincingly that the RPM agreement can be expected note only to provide the 

means  but  also  the  incentive  to  overcome  possible  free  riding  between  retailers  on  these 

services  and  that  the  pre-sales  services  overall  benefit  consumers  as  part  of  the 

demonstration that all the conditions of Article 101(3) are fulfilled.70 

69 Commission Notice – Guidelines on Vertical Restraints, O.J. C 291, 13.10.2000. 
70  This  softening  stance  in  Europe,  especially  in  recognising  the  freeriding  problem  on  pre-sales 
services,  follows  in  the  wake  of  the  importance  case  law  development  in  the  USA  where  in  Leegin 
Creative Leather Products, Inc. v. PSKS, Inc. (2007), the US Supreme Court abolished a nearly century-
old per se rule against RPM established in Dr. Miles Medicine Co. v. John D. Park & Sons (1911). The 
consequence of this 2007 court ruling is that RPM will be judged under federal antitrust law by the 

157 

 
 
 
                                                      
Final Report 

Levelling the Playing Field 2.0 

D.57  Recognition  of  the  economic  value  of  common  prices,  as  equivalent  in  outcome  to  fixed 

RPM, has been much longer in the context of horizontal agreements between competitors.  

In particular, fixed prices may be necessary in the case of a campaign for launching a product 

on  the  market  or  for  promoting  a  product  or  a  specific  assortment  with  price  positioning 

especially  as  regards  internet  sales.    This  can  involve  imposition  of  prices  at  the 

“commercialisation” level to allow the marketing of an assortment of branded articles in a 

reasonable price framework.  The benefits of such an arrangement are most apparent when 

the promotional campaign is carried out with the products offered at a single price – as this 

enhances retail brand image and provides assurance and clarity for consumers of the value-

for-money proposition being offered to them.  

D.58  EU  competition  policy  recognises  the  possibility  that  there  may  be  benefits  from  such 

arrangements.  According to the Horizontal Guidelines (point  240), joint commercialisation 

agreements  between  competitors  can  benefit  from  exemption  under  Article  101(3)  when 

the combined market share is below 15%.  Furthermore, “Example 3” of the Commission’s 

Horizontal Guidelines (point 254), in the context of joint internet platform, shows that price 

fixing can be exempted under Article 101(3), when it is indispensable for the integration of 

other  marketing  functions  and  the  attainment  of  economic  benefits,  which  at  the  end 

constitute  significant  efficiencies  that  are  of  benefit  to  consumers  and  ensure  that 

competition is not eliminated. 

D.59  Clearly, there is a need for competition policy to make a sensible judgement over situations 

where  fixed prices are  just  a promotional tool as opposed to an anti-competitive  collusive 

arrangement.   The  former  is much more  likely  to  take  precedence  over worries  about  the 

latter when (i) the products with fixed prices are limited in number, (ii) the duration of the 

agreement is short term (e.g. a two-week promotion), (iii) the promotion is at the request of 

(and perhaps partly sponsored) by a manufacturer, (iv) the promotion helps develop retail 

image  of  the  group  and  build  consumer  demand,  and  (v)  the  group  faces  effective 

competition  from  rival  retail  groups.      It  would  be  very  helpful  for  the  EC  to  develop 

guidelines  that  take  these  features  into  account  in  developing  a  sensible  policy  towards 

common pricing and joint commercialisation. 

rule  of  reason,  which  is  a  less  restrictive  standard  that  requires  courts  to  weigh  all  the  relevant 
circumstances of a case to assess whether a practice unreasonably restrains trade.   

158 

 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                        
Final Report 

Levelling the Playing Field 2.0 

159 

 
 
 
 
