Ref. Ares(2020)4709454 - 09/09/2020

Medicines for Europe  

Contribution to DG Competition Consultation 
on New Competition tool 

September 2020 

General Comment: 

Medicines for Europe welcomes this initiative, which complements the general objective of the European 
Commission to ensure that competition works properly in the market, especially in cases, as stressed in the 
latest  DG  Competition  Report  on  “Competition  enforcement  in  the  pharmaceutical  sector”  (2019): 
“Authorities  must  remain  vigilant  and  pro-active  in  investigating  potentially  anti-competitive  situations, 
including where new practices used by companies or new trends in the industry are concerned, such as the 
growing relevance of biosimilars.” 

Both Option 1 and 3 described in the inception impact assessment seem relevant for the generic, biosimilar 
and value added medicines industries.  

Competition issues for which the new competition tool may be relevant: 

•  Denigration of competitors & Misinformation to reduce competition:  

o  Use  of  the  power  on  the  market  to  denigrate  upcoming  or  current  competitors  (esp. 

biosimilars). 

•  Patent linkage 

o  The “unlawful” linkage between status of patents & decisions on MA/P&R is still in place 

in several EU countries: CZ, DE, FR, IT, NL, PL, PT, (RO). 

In the Pharma Sector Inquiry of 20091, the Commission committed to act against all forms 
of  patent  linkage.  Given  the  clear  delay  to  competition  generated  by  such  practice  at 
national level, we see the need for the EU to take action and “strictly enforce the applicable 
rules [and] act against patent linkage”, as stated in the 2009 Sector Inquiry.  

→ Need for an EU ban of patent linkage 
→ Meanwhile, the new tool should allow the EU to request Member States to change their 
legislation/practice that allow patent linkage in Europe and delay generic/biosimilar entry 
beyond IP expiries. 

1 Sector Inquiry Report: part 1 - part 2  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
•  Delayed competition & Damages 

o  To healthcare systems  

→  Need  for  mechanism  allowing  national  authorities  to  systematically  claim  damages 
caused  to  the  national  healthcare  systems,  in  compensation  for  overpaying  for  the 
medicine due to the lack of competition caused by the  conduct of dominant companies 
that delay off-patent entry. 

o  To competitors: 

While having an impact on public expenditure, practices delaying generic competition also 
create significant economic damages to generic companies. This is particularly the case for 
sham or vexatious litigation. A particularly problematic issue is the level of damages caused 
by  unduly  granted  preliminary  injunctions  (PI)  based  on  later  invalidated  patents.  For 
instance,  in  the  Central-Eastern  EU  region,  patentees  can  achieve  (PI)  relatively  easily, 
irrespective of the strength of the patent. Such PI can only be challenged via invalidation 
of the patent which may take several years, in the meantime the PI is still in force and the 
defendant  is  prevented  from  entering  the  market  with  the  generic  product.  After  a 
successful invalidation – and consequently removal of the PI – the damages caused by the 
PI based on an invalid patent are significant, but most regrettably in CEE jurisdictions these 
are  extremely  difficult  to  claim.  Such  outcome  goes  directly  against  the  Enforcement 
directive (Art. 9.) and impacts negatively the competition on the internal market. A clear 
example is Case C-688/17. National legislations regarding damages in case of an overturned 
PI is not as harmonized as it should be across Europe. 

→ Need for EU harmonization of legislation on damages to be paid to companies suffering 
from practices delaying competition 

•  Procurement 

o  Any form of discrimination of biosimilars vs the originator, which may take the form of slots 
reserved  for  originators,  with  long  litigation  and  subsequent  loss  of  the  market  for  the 
biosimilar. 

o  Cases similar to the Roche in Romania 2017-2019: Competition authority sanctioned Roche 
for anticompetitive behavior: 128mln Euro – in order to delay the access to the market 
of biosimilar products, Roche sold to partner distributors the product for a higher price 
than  its  bids  in  public  procurements,  making  it  impossible  for  competitors  to  win  the 
procurement,  overruling  an  existing  law  to  prevent  monopolizing  the  market  for  the 
distribution of a certain medicine, securing a monopoly of distribution ahead of biosimilar 
entry. 

•  Market strategies 

o  Cases  in  which  the originator,  by  using  their  position  of  power  on  the  market,  changes 
formulation or presentation (e.g. intramuscular, cutaneous/transdermal, sub-cutaneous, 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
etc.) of its product in order to shift patients to the new version with little significant clinical 
improvements. This results in de facto  reduction of the accessible market for new entrants 
by making use of protections acquired for follow-on version and preventing head-to-head 
competition of similar products. 

•  Pricing strategies  

o  Aggressive price cuts to make the market unattractive or even unprofitable for upcoming 
competitors.  The  effect  of  such  practice  may  be  a  reduction  of  competition,  since  new 
entrant will struggle to penetrate the market. Due to reduced or absent competition, it is 
expected that in the medium-long term prices of that product increase.  With blockbuster 
products marketed for several years in a monopolistic situation, such pricing strategy can 
be sustained by the originator to warrant potential competitor of the market, securing a 
longer de facto monopoly position or, at the very least,  a larger market share based on 
dominant position. This behavior is particularly apparent for biosimilar medicines, where 
due to relatively high cost of development (vis-à-vis generic medicines) it endangers the 
business continuity and development of future biosimilar versions. 
Pricing strategies are also widely addressed in the DG COMP Sector Inquiry of 2009, where 
it states that in countries where there is price linkage between originator and generic “The 
originator company may, for instance, force down the prices of generic competitors to a 
level where it is no longer profitable for them to sell the generic version. Of course, price 
reductions  are  in  any  case  to  be  expected  once  generic  versions  enter  the  market.  It  is 
therefore  difficult  to  identify  the  exact  reasons  behind  sharp  price  reductions  by  the 
originator company, particularly if they are not sustainable.” P.496 

•  Clawback and payback 

o  The application of an undifferentiated clawback or payback to the pharmaceutical industry, 
effectively transfers part of the overspending with protected medicines to the off-patent 
industry, indirectly supporting monopolies at the expense of competition. These practices 
disproportionately impact off-patent medicines, that typically operate with lower margins, 
creating unsustainable conditions for manufacturers that end withdrawing products from 
the market, reducing the competition and supply diversity. 

 
 
 
