A. 

Introduction and Executive Summary 

Microsoft appreciates the opportunity to comment on the European Commission’s  consultation regarding 
the development of a new competition tool (NCT).1  

In summary: 

•  Microsoft supports the Commission’s objective to ensure that its competition policy and rules are fit 
for the digital age and are capable of levelling the playing field so that business will invest, innovate 
and grow. The underlying market characteristics and dynamics that accompany digital transformation 
bring manifold benefits but also create legitimate concerns for which, in certain circumstances, there 
may be a gap in the current competition policy armory. 

•  There is wide support for expansion of the competition policy tool kit as an effective way to address 
these concerns, which reflects the strong reputation which the Commission’s competition policy has 
earned over the years through clear policy objectives, a coherent and internally consistent analytical 
framework, its technocratic, non-political approach and its robust procedural safeguards. 

•  Microsoft  supports  the  case  for  the  introduction  of  the  NCT;  it  is  however  important  that  the 
Commission  will  preserve  the  existing  benefits  of  competition  policy  built  up  over  decades  whilst 
equipping itself to address the legitimate concerns raised in recent years as to the effectiveness of the 
Commission’s powers. 

•  Microsoft believes that the preferred NCT option should be a market structure-based tool that applies 

to all sectors (i.e. Option 3):  

− 

In our view, the dominance-based options are unlikely to cover comprehensively the structural 
competition problems that the Commission will face, including markets that have not yet tipped 
but are prone to tipping and oligopolistic markets with an increased risk of tacit collusion.  

−  A sector-limited NCT would be less flexible, failing to capture structural competition problems in 
out-of-scope sectors; furthermore, a sectoral tool would raise the prospect of sterile disputes over 
‘jurisdiction’ rather than to focus on substance. It would also be open to charges of discrimination 
by prejudging that structural competition problems are likely to exist in certain sectors. 

•  Microsoft  considers  that,  on  balance,  the  NCT  should  solely  address  competition  issues  to  the 
exclusion of consumer protection considerations. While, admittedly, the line between the two are not 
always  easy  to  draw,  there  are  strong  arguments  for  a  competition-only  focus.  It  would  allow  the 
Commission to base the NCT on well-understood policy objectives and avoid more complex trade-offs 

1  European Commission, Public Consultation 3 June 2020 – 8 September 2020, Single Market – new 

complementary tool to strengthen competition enforcement, (see here) 

1 

   Microsoft Corporation  Response to the European Commission’s  Consultation on a ‘New Competition Tool’ (8 September 2020)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
generated  by  consumer  protection  considerations. A  wider  consumer  protection  policy  would  risk 
leading the Commission away from technical issues into a wider political minefield. 

•  The Commission will also need to make the sensitive decision of whether to address market failures 
stemming from legislation or regulation at either Member States or EU level. Given the objective of 
the NCT to address “structural competition problems” in full, Microsoft believes it would be appropriate 
for the Commission to be able to address concerns regardless of whether they stem from private or 
public conduct. 

•  The NCT would be more robust if the Commission were required to identify a plausible remedy at an 
early stage of the investigation. There are two reasons why such a requirement would be justified: 
first, the potential benefits to intervention in terms of effectiveness of remedies must be sufficiently 
concrete and likely to justify the significant costs of a market investigation (particularly in the absence 
of any deterrent effect); and, second, for the NCT, more than for other competition mechanism, it is 
the  remedy  which  determines  the  relevant  counterfactual  without  which  a  clear  competition 
assessment will not be possible.  

•  There would be a significant overlap between Option 3 of the NCT and the existing competition tools, 
in particular Articles 101 and 102. Microsoft believes there should be a priority rule for determining 
whether  it  is  more  appropriate  to  address  the  issues  with  the  NCT  or  the  Commission’s  existing 
powers. The  UK’s  market  investigation  regime  (which  has  obvious  similarities  with  Option  3  of  the 
NCT) provides a good basis for such a priority rule, namely that the NCT should only address problems 
within the scope of its conventional competition tools where (a) it has ‘reasonable grounds to suspect’ 
that  there  are  ‘features’  of  a  market  distorting  competition  but  does  not  have  sufficient  grounds  to 
establish a breach of its conventional competition tools or (b) action under its conventional competition 
tools ‘is likely to be ineffective.’2 

•  One of the most difficult issues will be the legal standard for the NCT. In Microsoft’s view, the NCT 
should apply a legal standard for intervention which is consistent with EU competition policy and, in 
particular,  the  Commission’s  existing  competition  policy  instruments. A  lowering  of  standards  away 
from  precedent  would  unjustifiably  disregard  the  Commission’s  and  the  EU  Courts’  decades  of 
experience and accumulated practice on the appropriate treatment of different types of conduct and 
market features. This calculus does not change materially due to the absence of fines or infringement 
decisions.3  The  standards  set  under Article  101  and  102  TFEU  focus  primarily  on  the  costs  and 
benefits of intervention without consideration for whether a fine will ultimately be imposed.4 

•  Procedural  safeguards  are  a  necessary  consequence  of  any  creation  of  novel  regulatory  powers. 
Again, inspiration can be drawn from the UK market investigation regime which has an elaborate set 
of procedural safeguards to ensure due process for these wide-ranging investigations, including (i) a 
two-phase  process,  where  a  Phase  I  market  study  may  lead  to  an  in-depth  (Phase  II)  market 
investigation; (ii) a strict legal test for opening a Phase II investigation which is a protection mechanism 
against “fishing expeditions”, i.e. lengthy investigations being launched without a clearly defined theory 

2  OFT, Guidance on Market Investigation References, 2006 (see here, original text has been adopted unamended 

3 

by the CMA).   
Amelia Fletcher, Market Investigations for Digital Platforms: Panacea or Complement? Centre for Competition 
Policy University of East Anglia, 6 August 2020. 

4  Wouter Wils, Optimal Antitrust Fines: Theory and Practice, World Competition Vol 29, No 2, June 2006.  

2 

 
 
 
 
 
 
of harm and without plausible remedies in prospect; and (iii) strict timelines, both for the conduct of 
Phase I and Phase II of its review. 

•  The final safeguard, and perhaps one of the most important for the legitimacy of the NCT relates to 
the right of judicial review: the substantive legal tests for the NCT must be sufficiently clear and precise 
to enable affected companies to challenge the Commission’s findings; and the scope and intensity of 
the review of the EU courts, in terms of merits, should be no less than what is accorded in relation to 
the existing competition tools. 

B. 

The Case for an Extension of the European Commission’s Competition Tool Kit 

The proposal to introduce an NCT is part of the Commission’s answer to the challenge that competition 
policy has increasingly fallen short. The claim is made that the competition agencies have been “asleep at 
the wheel” in recent years but also that the existing competition policy tools lack sufficient scope, flexibility, 
speed and powers to tackle today’s competition problems, particularly in the digital sector. This discussion 
is part of a far wider debate over the ability of the modern economy to deliver the best outcomes for society.  

Microsoft  recognises  that  the  underlying  market  characteristics  and  dynamics  that  accompany  digital 
transformation, which bring manifold benefits, at times create legitimate competition concerns which may 
be best addressed outside the context of traditional competition enforcement. While some of the additional 
burden of addressing those concerns will fall on ex ante regulation, there is strong support by many policy 
makers and commentators to rely heavily on competition policy and to expand the scope of its existing tool 
kit.  

This support reflects the good reputation which competition policy (both at a global but in particular at the 
EU  level)  enjoys,  despite  its  occasional  shortcomings.  This  reputation  was  forged  as  a  result  of  its 
conversion  towards  clear  policy  objectives;  its  coherent  and  internally  consistent  substantive  analytic 
framework; and its technocratic, non-political approach which is supported by clear procedural safeguards. 
The clarity of the competition policy framework, and of the economic theories underpinning it, support a 
consistent  legal  framework  for  enforcement  across  a  variety  of  different  market  structures  and  market 
characteristics. Furthermore, competition rules have been capable of adapting and changing over time to 
keep pace with innovation and changes in business practices, as well as preserving political legitimacy. 

The introduction of the NCT would mark a policy choice to widen the role of competition policy to address 
perceived failings and enforcement “gaps” through a hybridized instrument. In so doing, it will inevitably blur 
the line between competition policy and wider regulatory policy. The Commission would step from enforcing 
the law to managing a broader regulatory remit. While this does not automatically undermine the existing 
tenets of EU competition policy, the wider regulatory remit of the NCT – with more complex trade-offs – will 
inevitably put pressure on them.  

Microsoft  sees  a  case  for  the  introduction  of  the  NCT  to  address  the  gaps  in  existing  enforcement;  the 
challenge for the Commission will be to make sure that it does not throw out the baby with the bathwater: 
preserving  the  benefits  of  competition  policy  built  up  over  decades  whilst  equipping  the  Commission  to 
address the legitimate concerns raised in recent years as to the effectiveness of Commission’s competition 
powers.  

Microsoft  believes  that  this  can  be  achieved  if  the  existing  core  safeguards  of  competition  policy  are 
preserved and extended to the NCT; namely:  

3 

 
 
 
 
 
 
•  Substantive  safeguards:  Firstly,  the  NCT  must  be  in  line  with  the  existing  competition  policy 
objectives; second, the NCT must clearly identify the gaps in existing enforcement which it seeks to 
address and the standard for intervention must be tailored precisely to address those gaps, rather 
than granting broad discretion to intervene which supplants effective existing enforcement.   

•  Consistency safeguards: The NCT must not create issues of consistency and conflict with the existing 
legal  framework.  In  other  words,  it  must  be  clear  precisely  when  the  NCT  is  applicable  and  its 
enforcement should not undermine the existing framework.  

•  Procedural safeguards: There must be strong procedural safeguards to counterbalance the remedial 
powers with which the NCT is endowed. This requires safeguards on the rights of defense, as well 
as safeguards which ensure the efficiency and objectivity of the investigative process.  

•  Full judicial review: Clear and judiciable legal tests must be designed to allow for a full defense before 
the European Courts, both in respect of findings of structural competition problems and the imposition 
of remedies. 

 Microsoft sets out its views on each of these in turn.  

C. 

Substantive Safeguards 

Microsoft submits that the NCT needs to be designed to address gaps in existing enforcement with a robust 
objective standard for intervention rather than a “catch all” policy instrument that would, in effect, supplant 
the Commission’s existing powers. To this end, Microsoft sees two critical substantive safeguards, namely: 

(i)  a clearly defined scope such that the NCT is sufficiently wide to capture the relevant concerns but 

also delineate the boundaries of the tool (i.e. what issues the tool is not supposed to capture); and 

(ii)  early  identification  of  plausible  remedies  such  that  the  Commission  evaluates  whether  there  are 

suitable remedies to address the potentially harmful market features or conduct.  

C.1 

The right scope of the NCT 

The NCT poses two questions as to its appropriate scope: one explicit (i.e. which of the four policy options 
set  out  in  the  Consultation  is  the  right  one)  and  one  implicit  (i.e.  what  are  the  outer  limits  of  the  NCT’s 
scope). 

(i) 

The optimal policy option for the NCT 

The  four  policy  options  offered  by  the  Commission  in  the  Consultation  Process  are  defined  along  two 
dimensions: (i) policy reach: a narrow dominance-based tool versus a wide market-structure tool; and (ii) 
industry reach: a narrow tool for digital markets versus a wide tool which is universally applicable across all 
industries.  

As  outlined  in  Microsoft’s  submissions  on  the  inception  impact  assessment,  and  for  the  reasons  further 
detailed below, Microsoft believes that the preferred NCT option should be a market structure-based tool 
and should apply to all sectors (i.e. Option 3). 

Dominance-based tool versus market-structure based tool 

Microsoft believes that the dominance-based options are unlikely to cover comprehensively the structural 
competition problems the NCT is intended to address, including markets that have not yet tipped but are 

4 

 
 
 
 
 
prone  to  tipping,  oligopolistic  markets  with  an  increased  risk  for  tacit  collusion,  and  more  generally, 
competition concerns where an industry wide approach would be appropriate.  

Indeed, the dominance-based  option itself betrays a  conflict underpinning  the  NCT: is the “problem” the 
(in)effectiveness of Article 102 TFEU in addressing certain issues or a combination of issues including true 
regulatory “gaps” where Article 101 and Article 102 do not apply at all?  

If, however, the Commission concludes there is an insufficient regulatory gap to justify the introduction of a 
market structure-based tool, Microsoft believes that reform of Article 102 TFEU would be more appropriate 
than introduction of a purely dominance-based NCT. This would enhance legal certainty by ensuring that a 
consistent,  single  standard  for  intervention  applied  to  dominant  firms  while  not  destabilizing  the 
Commission’s existing competition instruments by introducing new powers in parallel.  

Sectoral Tool versus Horizontal Tool  

Microsoft also supports a horizontal rather than a sectoral approach for the NCT as this would be more 
flexible to capture the issues it seeks to address, as well as fairer and more defensible under the rule of 
law.  

A  sector-limited  NCT  would  be  less  flexible,  failing  to  capture  structural  competition  problems  in  out-of-
scope  sectors.  While  the  market  failures  particularly  associated  with  digital  markets  such  as  strong 
economies of scale and network effects may be more prevalent in the platform economy, these issues are 
not novel and go beyond the digital sector. Decades on, the VHS-Betamax “format wars” remain a textbook 
example of how significant network effects can cause a market to “tip” to VHS even in the “analog” world.5 
There  are  also  examples  of  network  effects  and  tipping  in  markets  ranging  from  financial  infrastructure 
through to payment systems and telecommunications.  

Furthermore, a sectoral-only tool raises the prospect of sterile disputes over “jurisdiction” rather than focus 
on substance. As the impact of digitalization spreads, the line between markets that are and are not digital 
is likely to become difficult to discern and arguably less relevant. When, for example, would the payment 
system  sector  be  sufficiently  digitized  for  the  NCT  to  apply  and  would  it  then  only  apply  to  the  digital 
challengers or also to the (non-digital) incumbents? And the NCT would risk becoming redundant or only of 
narrow relevance as technology and industry advances if it is too narrowly drawn. 

A sectoral-only tool would, finally, also be open to charges of discrimination by prejudging that structural 
competition problems are likely to exist in certain sectors. If it is necessary to limit the scope of the NCT to 
sectors “prone” to certain issues, one could infer that these issues cannot be easily identified on a case-by-
case basis, and that it may be more appropriate to rely on ex-ante sectoral regulation. 

(ii) 

The outer limits of the NCT (Option 3) 

While  Option  3  has  the  advantages  of  a  wide  reach  and  will  potentially  capture  many,  if  not  all,  of  the 
competition concerns which cannot be addressed effectively with the existing Article 101/102 tool kit, it also 
raises the question of what should be the outer limits of the NCT. This has two key dimensions:  

5  H. Ohashi, 2004, The Role of Network Effects in the US VCR Market, 1978–1986, Journal of Economics & 

Management Strategy. On the significance of those network effects, Ohashi considered that with a minor 
strategic adjustment the market could have just as easily tipped in the other direction: “if Sony, the system 
sponsor of Beta, had aggressively introduced its VCRs at the early stage of competition, Beta would likely have 
dominated the market in 1985; instead, the format disappeared in 1989.” 

5 

 
 
 
 
 
 
•  Competition  /  consumer  policy:  should  the  NCT  solely  address  market  failures  stemming  from 
competition problems (competition policy) or also those relating to other policy objectives (notably 
consumer policy)?  

•  Public  /  private  domain:  should  the  NCT  address  market  failures  stemming  from  EU  or  national 
government intervention through legislation and decisions etc. (public domain) as well as from private 
actors (private domain)?   

To put this into context, it is instructive to look to the Market Investigation Regime (“MIR”) in the UK – which 
on the surface – has potential similarities with Option 3 set out by the Commission. Under the MIR, the 
CMA can address market failures stemming from both competition and consumer policy as well as those 
stemming from the public as well as the private domain. In the first instance, the CMA has reviewed both 
conventional  competition  issues  (e.g.  exclusionary  conduct  by  dominant  firms,  see  BSkyB  Market 
Investigation (2012)) and unconventional competition policy (e.g. exploitative conduct by dominant firms, 
see BAA Market Investigation (2009).6 The CMA has, however, also reviewed issues that stem from issues 
of consumer policy (e.g. exploitative conduct where a proportion of customers do not switch due to inertia 
UK Energy Market Investigation (2016)).7 In the second instance, the CMA has also identified where UK 
regulation or legislation is hampering the effective operation of markets and put forward recommendations 
for legislative and regulatory reform (e.g. UK Energy Market Investigation).  

Competition policy vs consumer policy   

First, Microsoft considers that, on balance, the NCT should solely focus on competition policy issues.  

The distinction between competition policy and consumer policy is encapsulated in the question of whether 
the NCT should solely protect the integrity of the market mechanism by intervening where necessary to 
ensure “effective” competition takes place (competition policy) or whether it should also intervene to pursue 
wider issues of consumer policy (e.g. fair distribution of the benefits of competitive process). If the former 
holds, the NCT would only address structural competition problems that stem from the supply side (e.g. 
where firms have sought to restrict multi-homing). If the latter holds, the NCT would also address structural 
“competition” problems stemming from the demand side  (e.g. where consumer inertia  means that some 
customers do not stimulate and do not benefit from the competitive process).8 That said, the line between 
competition policy and consumer policy is not  always clear cut: firms may adapt practices which  exploit 
consumer behavior. Such practices can however be addressed as part of extended competition policy (e.g. 
where firms tacitly collude).   

Microsoft  believes  there  are  strong  policy  and  economic  reasons  for  limiting  the  scope  of  the  NCT  to 
competition policy issues.  

•  The  NCT  would  be  based  on  a  single  well-understood  policy  objective  consistent  with  the 
Commission’s existing competition powers. Were the NCT to embrace consumer policy issues, the 
Commission’s mandate would expand to consumer policy in which it has no existing experience.  

•  The  Commission  would  not  have  to  consider  more  complex  regulatory  trade-offs  generated  by 
consumer policy considerations (e.g. whether some consumers should be protected to the longer-

6  Competition Commission, Movies on Pay-TV, Final Report, 2012. 
7 
8 

Energy market investigation, Final Report, 2016. 
See contribution of BEUC in the OECD Summary of Discussion of the Roundtable on consumer-facing remedies 
(available here: https://one.oecd.org/document/DAF/COMP/WP3/M(2018)1/ANN3/FINAL/en/pdf  

6 

 
 
 
 
 
 
term  detriment  of  the  competitive  process)  for  which  it  is  currently  less  well  suited  given  its  core 
competition policy mandate.  

• 

In a similar vein, the Commission would not be drawn into overtly political issues. Consumer policy 
and,  more  broadly,  the  trade-off  between  competition  policy  and  consumer  policy  would  involve 
issues  of  economic  distribution  within  European  societies  which  are  more  properly  the  remit  of 
legislators.   

The UK’s market  investigation regime  illustrates the complexity of trade-offs between competition policy 
and consumer  policy. For example, the CMA’s energy market investigation, saw the CMA balancing the 
protection of passive consumers’ interests against the long-term concern that intervention would undermine 
the competitive  process (by disincentivizing consumers from driving competition).9 In deciding against  a 
broader  price  cap  the  CMA  noted  that  “there  were  material  risks  of  adverse  consequences  from  the 
introduction of a price cap for a large number of customers which outweighed the short-term reduction of 
detriment” but that the dissenting opinion of one panelist represented a “difference in view [which] reflects, 
in part, members’ respective judgements on the likelihood that better outcomes will be delivered through 
competitive markets with more engaged customers over the next few years.”10 Such differences of opinion 
highlight that these issues require circumspection as well as an ability to make complex policy trade-offs 
and public value judgments which pure competition authorities are typically ill-suited to make. 

Public domain and private domain 

Second, the Commission will need to make the sensitive decision of whether to address market failures 
stemming from legislation or regulation at either the Member State or EU level. Microsoft observes that the 
Treaties already provide – to a limited degree – such powers. So-called “gap filling” means that national 
legislation and regulation which axiomatically leads to an infringement of Article 101 TFEU or Article 102 
TFEU  is  prohibited.11  Furthermore,  given  the  objective  of  the  NCT  to  address  “structural  competition 
problems” in full, it would be appropriate for the Commission to be able to address concerns regardless of 
whether they stem from private or public conduct. 

C.2 

Early identification of suitable remedies 

The NCT also raises question of how and when the Commission will determine suitable remedies for an 
instrument which would address a significantly wider range of potentially problematic conduct and market 
features than the Commission’s existing powers.  

Microsoft strongly suggests that the NCT would be more robust if the Commission is required to identify a 
plausible remedy at an early stage of the investigation. There are two reasons why such an obligation is 
justified: first, the potential benefits to intervention in terms of effectiveness of remedies must be sufficiently 
concrete and likely to justify the significant costs of a market investigation (particularly in the absence of 
any deterrent effect); and, second, for the NCT, more than for other competition mechanism, it is the remedy 
which determines the relevant counterfactual. In other words, the remedy considerations are not a separate 
workstream  following  the  competition  assessment,  they  are  an  integral  part  thereof,  setting  the  overall 
framework in which the analysis takes place.  

Energy market investigation, Final Report, 15.43-15.48.  

9 
10  Energy market investigation, Final Report, 15.48.  
11  Julio Baquero Cruz, Between Competition and Free Movement: The Economic Constitutional Law of the 

European Community, Hart Publishing, 2002. 

7 

 
 
 
 
 
 
(i) 

Cost benefit considerations 

A requirement to identify a plausible remedy at an early stage would be a simple insurance mechanism 
against the risk that significant costs are incurred before the Commission is able to conclude that there are 
no suitable remedies to address the relevant concerns.  

The Commission’s existing powers require the identification of an anti-competitive act (e.g. an agreement 
or  unilateral  conduct)  which,  in  turn,  typically  gives  a  straightforward  remedy:  prohibition  of  the  relevant 
agreement  or  conduct.  Only  in  limited  circumstances  do  the  Commission’s  existing  powers  require 
mandatory remedies (e.g. abusive refusal to supply requires the Commission to mandate access). This, in 
turn,  means  that  the  costs  of  intervention  and  the  likely  availability  of  remedies  should  be  (relatively) 
straightforward: the Commission need only evaluate the costs and ability to reverse the anti-competitive 
act.   

In  contrast,  the  NCT  would  have  a  significantly  wider  scope  and  thus  a  universe  of  potential  structural 
problems. And while the NCT may in theory be capable of identifying a large number of market imperfections 
and resulting concerns, not all of them can be effectively remedied nor are the countervailing costs of such 
remedies  straightforward.  To  illustrate  this,  one  of  the  Commission’s  key  concerns  is  maintaining 
competitive  pressure  on  market  “gatekeepers”  and  ensuring  that  markets  do  not  unduly  “tip”  towards  a 
single platform. There are a range of theoretical remedies for such concerns: e.g. facilitating multi-homing. 
These remedies carry, however, different costs (e.g. the differing  disincentive effects on investment from 
such interventions) and may be more or less feasible depending on the circumstances.12  

A requirement to identify a plausible remedy at an early stage would thus ensure that the costs of an in-
depth  investigation  would  only  be  expended  if  there  is  a  reasonable  prospect  of  any  concern  (should  it 
exist)  being  capable  of  being  remedied  (without  the  cost  outweighing  the  benefits  of  intervention). This 
approach would be consistent with the UK market investigation regime which provides that the CMA should, 
inter alia, only consider launching a market investigation where (i) the scale of the suspected problem, in 
terms of its adverse effect on competition, is such that a reference would be an appropriate response; and 
(ii) ‘there is a reasonable chance that appropriate remedies will be available.’13 This can also be seen in 
practice. For example, the CMA opted not to take refer Online Platforms and Digital Advertising (2020) for 
a market  investigation despite having identified  prima facie concerns because the CMA  did not,  in part, 
have suitable remedial powers to address the relevant issues.14  

(ii) 

Remedy as determinant of the counterfactual 

Furthermore, at a more technical level, it is important to define the correct counterfactual against which to 
measure intervention under the NCT. 

In  the  case  of  a  merger  control  and  the  control  of  restrictive  agreements,  the  identification  of  the 
counterfactual is relatively straightforward: For merger control, this is a world in the absence of the merger 
which  in  most  (but  not  all)  circumstances  means  the  continuation  of  the  status  quo;  for  restrictive 
agreements, the counterfactual is the world without the restriction or, if the restriction is ancillary the world 

12  See the “topsy-turvy principle” outlined first by Jean-Charles Rochet and Jean Tirole, Two-Sided Markets: An 

Overview, 2004.   

13  OFT, Guidance on Market Investigation References, 2006 (see here, original text has been adopted unamended 

by the CMA). 

14  Online platforms and digital advertising, Market study final report, 1 July 2020 (here), see 9.30. The CMA’s 

decision rested “primarily on whether [a market investigation] is the most appropriate and effective mechanism 
for delivering the kinds of interventions we are proposing”. 

8 

 
 
 
 
 
 
without  the  agreement.  Because  the  factual  and  counterfactual  are  obvious  in  these  instances,  the 
competitive analysis and the remedy considerations often appear separate from each other.15 This however 
is not always the case. Some abuse of dominance cases, where the situation is more complex, provides 
an  illustration:  while  it  still  holds  true  that  the  counterfactual  is  a  world  without  abuse,  the  nature  of  the 
abuse is defined by the remedy. A remedy which imposes an obligation to sell products separately means 
that the abuse was a tying abuse; by contrast, a “must carry” remedy (mandatory remedy) implies that the 
dominant  firm  has  committed  an  unlawful  refusal  to  supply.  Both  remedies  lead  to  very  different 
counterfactuals, namely a  world  in which products will be sold separately (in  the case of  an  unbundling 
scenarios) versus a world in which the dominant players and its competitors bundle their products together 
with the dominant product.   

In the case of the NCT, the competitive analysis and the remedy are even more intertwined through the 
counterfactual. Contrary to the other competition instruments, there exists no anticompetitive act (whether 
anticompetitive  merger,  restrictive  agreement  or  abusive  behavior)  and  hence  there  is  no  “natural 
counterfactual”; merely a list of potentially problematic market features and an even greater list of potential 
remedies to address the problematic features. For an NCT investigation, the factual is the status quo, i.e. 
the  world  as  we  know  it,  and  the  counterfactual  is  the  world  with  whatever  remedy  or  remedies  the 
Commission may wish to impose.  

For example, where the problem is perceived as a lack of interoperability is the appropriate counterfactual 
a  scenario  where  partial  or  full  interoperability  is  permitted  and  are  all  firms  or  only  the  dominant  firm 
deemed to be providing interoperability? Equally, in the context of the MIR, the Competition Commission 
found,  inter  alia,  a  lack  of  competition  for  airports  around  London  due  to  BAA’s  dominant  position  for 
operating such airports and required BAA to divest Gatwick and Stansted (while keeping Heathrow).16 The 
counterfactual was thus defined by the divestment obligation as this set the counterfactual for evaluating 
the costs and benefits of intervention.  

Absent clarity on the nature of the remedies, the Commission will not be able to define the counterfactual 
and hence not able to carry out its competition assessment.  

D. 

Consistency safeguard 

Microsoft submits that the NCT must be consistent with the Commission’s existing competition powers so 
as not to undermine the coherency of EU competition policy.   

EU competition law has made significant strides to increase the consistency of treatment for similar conduct 
in the application of its various policy instruments. The analytical framework between merger control, control 
of restrictive agreements and abuse of dominance has converged, and competition law has been adapted 
and applied  in a consistent yet  effective way in  new  markets.  Significant  progress has, for example, be 
made  in  terms  harmonizing  the  definition  of  restriction  of  competition,  including  an  increasingly  aligned 
distinction between “object” restrictions/conduct across Article 101 and 102 TFEU (i.e. acts which have no 
plausible efficiencies justification and are presumptively harmful) and “effects” restrictions/conduct (i.e. acts 
which  have  a  plausible  presumption  of  potential  efficiencies  and  no  presumptive  harm). Additionally,  a 
common test for countervailing efficiencies under Article 101(3) and “Article 102(3)” has emerged, and at a 

15  Pablo Ibanez-Colomo ‘Indispensability and Abuse of Dominance: From Commercial Solvents to Slovak Telekom 

and Google Shopping’ 

16  Case 1110/6/8/09 BAA Limited v CC, CAT 35, 2009. 

9 

 
 
 
 
 
 
narrower level, the as efficient competitor standard has helped to bring consistency across different heads 
of pricing abuse under Article 102 TFEU.  

The benefits of internal consistency of competition law in the treatment of conduct with similar market effects 
are twofold: first, consistency avoids market distortions; market participants will not be incentivized to adjust 
their behavior in a purely technical way so as to benefit from a more lenient regime, for example, structuring 
a  JV  in  such  a  way  as  to  benefit  from  concentration  privilege.  Second,  consistency  avoids  “regulatory 
arbitrage” by the Commission; there is no temptation to characterize an arrangement in a particular way in 
order to lower the burden for infringement.  

While the NCT Consultation focuses on how to achieve a ‘smooth interaction’ between the NCT and sector 
specific legislation (e.g. in financial services and telecoms), Microsoft submits that it is equally important 
that the NCT fits into the existing  competition  law toolbox in  a  way which does not conflict with existing 
tools.17  

As  Microsoft  favors  Option  3  over  the  alternative  options,  this  submission  will  focus  primarily  on  the 
consistency issues raised by the market-structure-based Option (see Section D.1); but we will also briefly 
touch upon the consistency problems raised by the dominance-structure option (see Section D.2) 

D.1  Consistency challenge for the market structure-based tool 

As  outlined  in  the  Commission’s  inception  impact  assessment,  the  market  structure-based  tool  would 
address problems  ‘which cannot be addressed (at  all or as effectively) under the EU competition rules’. 
This is comparable to the rationale and scope of the UK MIR. However, under this type of regime, complex 
consistency issues arise in relation to the identification and separation of the distinct problems that the tool 
is intended to address. 

(i) 

Need for a priority rule 

In the first instance, where the scope of the NCT overlaps with the Commission’s existing powers, Microsoft 
believes there should be a priority rule for determining whether it is more appropriate to address the issues 
with the NCT or the Commission’s existing powers.  

While a market structure-based tool would cover issues outside of the scope of the Commission’s existing 
powers,  the  NCT  would,  in  this  guise,  also  address  issues  which  ostensibly  fall  within  the  scope  of  the 
Commission’s existing powers but where the NCT is the more appropriate policy instrument. In theory, the 
legal doctrine of lex specialis derogat legi generali (a special law derogates from a general law)  already 
provides a basis of priority. The principle holds that a law governing a specific subject matter – in this case, 
existing application of Article 101 and 102 TFEU – should override a law governing more general matters 
–  in  this  case,  the  broader  scoped  NCT.18  The  Commission  should  thus  only  use  the  NCT  where  the 
Commission’s existing powers do not apply. 

This  rule  is,  however,  too  black  and  white  for  the  NCT  which,  as  the  Commission  outlines  in  the  IIA,  is 
intended  to  address  circumstances  where  the  existing  rules  do  not  ‘effectively’  deal  with  the  underlying 
concerns (i.e. where there is a plausible overlap). Addressing similar concerns with multiple tools requires 
a clear and predictable set of rules which dictate the circumstances in which one or another instrument is 
applicable. Specifically, the priority rule must identify the scenarios where the existing competition rules are 

17  Consultation Questionnaire, Question 29. 
18  The doctrine is relevant in particular where two provisions pursue the same objective and have contradictory 

elements. See Case C-199/11, Commission v Otis NV and others, Opinion of AG Cruz Villalón, 2012, para. 26.  

10 

 
 
 
 
 
 
not “effective” and the NCT applies. This would be in keeping with the UK’s market investigation regime 
which  provides  that  a  market  investigation  should  only  address  problems  within  the  scope  of  its 
conventional competition tools where (a) it has ‘reasonable grounds to suspect’ that there are ‘features’ of 
a market distorting competition but does not have sufficient grounds to establish a breach of its conventional 
competition tools or (b) action under its conventional competition tools  ‘is likely to be ineffective.’19 More 
specifically,  the  CMA’s  guidance  on  market  investigation  references  outlines  that  the  great  majority  of 
references are likely to involve industry-wide market features or multi-firm conduct, for example, networks 
of parallel vertical agreements, non-conduct based harm or tacit collusion, and that single-firm conduct will 
generally be dealt with under existing competition rules, save for where the conduct is derived from certain 
structural features of the market which themselves have adverse effects.20  

In light of the above, Microsoft believes that legal certainty would be significantly enhanced by a priority rule 
between the NCT and the existing competition rules (and whether there would remain a role for the Sector 
Inquiry at all should be considered). To be effective, the priority rule must clearly outline the type of cases 
where the NCT is more appropriate (e.g. where market-wide remedies are required).   

(ii) 

Application of consistent standard 

Furthermore,  Microsoft  believes  that  the  NCT  must  also  apply  a  legal  standard  for  intervention  that  is 
consistent with EU competition policy and, in particular, the Commission’s existing competition instruments.  

Even  where  the  NCT  is  addressing  issues  within  the  scope  of  the  Commission’s  existing  powers,  it  is 
important that a similar standard for intervention applies:  

•  A  move  away  from  precedent  would  unjustifiably  disregard  the  Commission’s  and  the  EU  Courts’ 
decades of experience and accumulated practice on the appropriate treatment of different types of 
conduct  and  market  features.  EU  jurisprudence  applies,  for  example,  different  standards  for 
intervening where a dominant firm is engaging in exclusive dealing (effects- standard) and where a 
dominant  firm  is  refusing  to  deal  (indispensability-standard):  this  reflects  the  assessment  of  the 
relative  merits  of  intervening  in  such  circumstances.21  If  the  NCT  is  intended  to  relax  existing 
requirements under case  law, for  example, relating to the  essential facilities doctrine  or to  market 
definition in dominance cases, it would be better to address these issues directly in a way which is 
consistent with the existing framework. Otherwise, the creation of an alternative standard may create 
a regulatory incentive to use the NCT over the Commission’s existing powers (or vice versa), which 
would work to the detriment of legal certainty and deterrence value established under Articles 101 
and 102 TFEU. 

19  OFT, Guidance on Market Investigation References, 2006 (see here, original text has been adopted unamended 

20 

by the CMA).   
Ibid, paras 2.2 to 2.8. Nevertheless, in some instances, UK market investigations have focused on concerns that 
would also fall within the scope of the CMA’s conventional competition tools. For example, in Movies on Pay-TV, 
the theory of harm was that access to movie content was a ‘significant’ factor in consumers selecting a pay-tv 
provider and Sky’s control meant that other pay-tv providers could not compete effectively. The theory of harm 
was thus a de facto abuse case pursuant to Article 102 TFEU whereby Sky was allegedly refusing to supply or 
degrading supply of an essential input. 

21  P. Ibanez Colomo, Indispensability and Abuse of Dominance: From Commercial Solvents to Slovak Telekom and 
Google Shopping, Journal of European Competition Law & Practice, Volume 10, Issue 9, November 2019, 
Pages 532–551. 

11 

 
 
 
 
 
 
•  This calculus does not change materially due to the absence of fines or infringement decisions.22 The 
standards  set  under  Article  101  and  102  TFEU  focus  primarily  on  the  costs  and  benefits  of 
intervention without consideration for whether a fine will ultimately be imposed.23 Furthermore, Article 
101 and Article 102 TFEU  are flexible instruments that permit both commitment  decisions (i.e.  no 
infringement and no fine) and infringement decisions without a fine. As such, the fact that the NCT 
would not involve an infringement decision should not affect the standard set for intervention under 
the NCT. 

Moreover,  an  approach  consistent  with  existing  precedent  would  not  undermine  the  aim  of  the  NCT  to 
permit earlier intervention. It is possible to achieve this goal by creating rules which are complementary to 
rather than conflicting with Articles 101 and 102 TFEU while expanding the scope of the NCT to address 
conduct and market features (allowing intervention so that markets can “self-right” by improving the market 
mechanism).  

On the other hand,  even where the NCT  is addressing issues outside the scope of the  existing rules, it 
remains important that similar standard for intervention is applied. This is to ensure the coherency of EU 
competition policy. The NCT is, for example, expected to address structural competition problems stemming 
from unilateral conduct of non-dominant firms (e.g. in relation to limitations on multi-homing). Such conduct 
is – rightfully – presumed to be less likely to harm competition than conduct by dominant firms. It would be 
paradoxical then if the NCT were to apply a lower standard of intervention to such conduct that Article 102 
TFEU  applies  to  unilateral  conduct  by  dominant  firms.  More  practically,  it  would  also  create  a  perverse 
regulatory incentive to prioritize investigations of conduct which in principle is less likely to be harmful due 
to the lower standard for intervention (and thus the greater ease for successfully intervening).  

(iii) 

Remedies 

Finally,  Microsoft  believes  that  the  NCT  should  be  equipped  with  remedial  powers  consistent  with  the 
Commission’s existing powers and proportionate to the structural competition problems that are ultimately 
within its scope.24  

Ensuring consistency – in principle – with the Commission’s remedial powers for Article 101 and Article 102 
TFEU would not unduly hamper the NCT. Indeed, the Commission’s existing remedial powers provide, in 
principle,  the  ability  to  impose  any  form  of  structural  or  behavioral  remedy  on  private  actors.  Under 
Regulation 1/2003, the Commission is entitled to impose ‘any behavioural or structural remedies which are 
proportionate to the infringement committed and necessary to bring the infringement effectively to an end.’25 
While the market structure-based tool would cover a significantly wider range of issues and thus inevitably 
a wider set of regulatory solutions, the Commission’s existing powers already provide significant flexibility. 
There is thus no need to expand or loosen the Commission’s already significant remedial powers under 
competition policy. 

Microsoft believes, however, that the Commission’s powers under the NCT should be limited to ending the 
structural competition problem or the cause of a structural competition problem – but not the effects of that 
problem.  In  other  words,  the  Commission’s  remedial  powers  should  be  restricted  to  improving  the 
competitive process. Where it is unable to improve the competitive process, it should not have broad powers 

22  Amelia Fletcher, Market Investigations for Digital Platforms: Panacea or Complement? Centre for Competition 

Policy University of East Anglia, 6 August 2020. 

23  Wouter Wils, Optimal Antitrust Fines: Theory and Practice, World Competition Vol 29, No 2, June 2006.  
24  Consultation Questionnaire, Questions 30 – 32.  
25  Article 7, Régulation 1/2003. 

12 

 
 
 
 
 
 
to impose, for example, industry price regulation. Such measures are better left to sector specific regulators 
and, if necessary, the Commission could make recommendations as such. This ensures consistency with 
the Commission’s existing powers (which are limited to ceasing the infringement) as well as ensuring that 
the Commission does not become a de facto sectoral regulator. 

D.2  Consistency challenge for the dominance-based competition tool 

As  outlined  in  our  response  to  the  inception  impact  assessment,  Microsoft  does  not  believe  that  a 
dominance-based  tool  would  be  suitable  to  address  the  full  scope  of  the  concerns  outlined  by  the 
Commission. Furthermore, Microsoft also notes that a dominance-based competition tool would also give 
rise to an obvious and inherent issue of consistency.  

In simple terms, the NCT would become an instrument to circumvent the higher standard imposed by Article 
102 TFEU  (in  at  least  certain  circumstances). This  can  be  inferred  from  the  IIA  which  provides  that  the 
dominance-based  tool  is  intended  to  enable  intervention  ‘before  a  dominant  company  successfully 
forecloses competitors or raises their costs’. The overlap between Article 102 TFEU and the new tool is 
thus  part  and  parcel  of  the  objective  of  enabling  earlier  intervention.  However,  the  corollary  to  “early 
intervention” is that the NCT will carry a lower standard than Article 102 TFEU in order to permit intervention 
where establishing the elements of an abuse under Article 102 TFEU presents too high a bar. Otherwise, 
the  Commission  would have two  instruments (the NCT and Article  102 TFEU) that  largely achieved the 
same policy objectives.  

While a lower standard may of course be merited (delayed intervention may, for example, not be sufficient 
to preserve effective competition  in some (fast-moving) markets), the Commission’s proposal  this would 
result in conflicting legal standards which pursue similar objectives for the same conduct, creating a strong 
regulatory incentive to bring cases under the new tool wherever possible. This would render nugatory the 
deterrence value of Article  102 TFEU, essentially reducing  its practical scope to cases where harm has 
already occurred, and  no remedial action is necessary or possible.  Where it is seeking remedies rather 
than an infringement decision, the Commission will have little incentive to pursue the higher standard under 
the traditional route given the likelihood that the NCT will carry enhanced remedies powers.  

As set out above, Microsoft thus considers reform to Article 102 TFEU the more appropriate solution as it 
avoids having two conflicting instruments to address the same conduct. More specifically, given that the 
Commission’s principal charge seems to be the lack of administrative flexibility to intervene early in cases, 
reform and expansion to the “interim measures” regime may be an alternative route to achieve the desired 
purpose.  

E. 

Procedural safeguards 

Procedural  safeguards  are  key  for  maintaining  the  objective  and  transparent  application  of  competition 
policy  (and  ultimately  for  maintaining  support  for  the  system).  Procedural  safeguards  should  be 
proportionate to the restriction of rights that the new powers entail and the costs which result from their 
exercise. In particular, these must ensure that the rights of defense of the affected parties are protected 
and that the process cannot be abused for political reasons or otherwise misused.  

Some inspiration may be drawn from the UK market investigation regime which has an elaborate set of 
procedural safeguards to ensure due process for these wide-ranging investigations, including a two-phase 
process and separation of decision-makers between Phase I and Phase II. These ensure that the MIR is 

13 

 
 
 
 
 
not used or perceived as a “shortcut” to traditional competition enforcement, and that any remedial actions 
considered are based on a detailed and thorough assessment.   

E.1 

The right structure for the investigative process  

(i) 

A two-stage procedure 

Microsoft believes that the NCT investigative process should be subject to a two-stage process. The first 
phase should be concerned with establishing whether a prima facie structural competition problem exists 
and whether it can be remedied under the NCT, and the second phase should be primarily concerned with 
determining which (if any) remedies are appropriate and proportionate.  

The separation of these processes is appropriate for a few reasons. First, the two issues will be subject to 
separate  substantive  assessments  which  will  require  differing  levels  of  information  gathering  and  rigor. 
Second, the possibility of remedies will require affected parties to incur significant additional costs in order 
to ensure fair treatment. Third, the Phase I / Phase II model has the advantage of being well known in the 
context of existing EU competition law procedure, for example in the context of the EU merger regulation. 

Furthermore, Microsoft considers that the proper implementation of a two-stage NCT process would require 
the Commission’s Sector Inquiry tool either to be discarded, or for its use to time-bar the opening of an NCT 
investigation. This will be necessary to avoid the Sector Inquiry tool being used as the de facto “Phase 0” 
or “prenotification phase” of the NCT.  

(ii) 

A strict legal test for opening a Phase II investigation 

Phase II investigations will generate significant costs, both administratively and for the market participants 
involved. As such, they should not be used as a tool for the Commission to engage in “fishing expeditions” 
where lengthy investigations are launched without a clearly defined theory of harm and without plausible 
remedies in prospect.26  

The Commission may currently open a sector inquiry where it considers that a market is not working as 
well as it should and where breaches of competition rules may be a contributory factor. The Commission 
may consider a similar test for the opening of a Phase I NCT investigation, adjusted to reflect a concern of 
“structural  competition  problems”.  However,  stricter  legal  test  for  Phase  II  is  necessary  because  of  the 
significant  additional  costs  associated  with  the  NCT’s  remedial  powers.  This  rationale  is  line  with  the 
experience  in  the  UK  market  investigation  regime  where  over  time  the  (preliminary)  market  study  has 
developed into a Phase I investigation which may (or may not) lead to a market investigation reference (de 
facto, an in-depth investigation) if the requisite legal test is satisfied.  

The  threat  of  market-wide  remedies  will  effectively  force  companies  subject  to  an  NCT  investigation  to 
invest  significant  resources  to  make  their  case  why  significant  remedial  intervention  is  unnecessary. 
Microsoft therefore submits that the legal test should require the Commission to outline potential remedies, 
both to ensure that there are plausible remedies in contemplation (as discussed under section C) but also 

26  This follows from the duty to give reasons which is a basic principle of EU law arising from Article 296(2) TFEU 

and under Article 41(2)c) of the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union. The obligation to give 
reasons is specific to the legal basis of the action and must disclose in a clear and unequivocal fashion the 
reasoning leading to the adoption of the decision so as to enable an affected party to challenge the decision by 
judicial review. 

14 

 
 
 
 
 
 
to provide the affected companies sufficient explanation of the nature of the investigation in order to properly 
make their defense as to why remedies are not required.   

(iii) 

A “fresh pair of eyes” 

Microsoft believes that the Commission should reflect the UK’s “fresh pair of eyes” approach in a way which 
is compatible with the institutional and procedural set up at EU level, building on and strengthening the oral 
hearing procedure under existing merger and antitrust investigations.  

Under the UK market investigation regime, there is a division of powers between the decision to refer a 
market investigation and the market investigation itself. This used to be split between the Office for Fair 
Trading and the Competition Commission respectively, but even upon the on the creation of the CMA, the 
split was maintained, with the first decision taken by the CMA Board, and the market investigation run by 
independent  decision  makers.  No  overlap  of  personnel  between  the  two  is  allowed.  The  market 
investigation is therefore a new independent investigation which looks at the market with a “fresh pair of 
eyes”.27 

The administrative model of antitrust in the EU has sometimes been criticized given the Commission’s role 
as “judge, jury and executioner” of antitrust cases.28 While this criticism has been levied in the context of 
the application of pure antitrust rules, where relatively consistent legal tests have been developed, Microsoft 
considers that there is an even greater need for a “fresh pair of eyes” when considering new types of issues 
(e.g.  “suboptimal”  market  structures)  under  the  NCT,  for  which  consistent  legal  tests  may  take  time  to 
develop.  

That  said,  while  the  panel  model  is  compatible  with  the  UK  competition  system  with  its  long  history  of 
institutional separation (stemming from the previous split between the OFT and Competition Commission) 
– it would be somewhat alien to  EU competition  law.  Over the years, the  Commission has developed  a 
number of procedural safeguards which in some cases, have not had the full desired effect. In particular, 
the oral hearing procedure has previously been criticized by the OECD which noted among other things 
that neither the ultimate decision-maker – the College – nor the Competition Commissioner were required 
to  attend  the  oral  hearing.29  The  NCT  may  present  an  opportunity  to  reinvigorate  existing  procedural 
safeguards,  or  develop  new  safeguards,  in  the  context  of  a  new  process,  which  if  successful,  could  be 
translated into existing merger control and antitrust procedures. For example, in the context of the current 
EU competition law procedure, the oral hearing comes at a relatively advanced stage in the antitrust and 
merger control procedure which arguably reduces its effectiveness as a procedural safeguard. Indeed, the 
limited perception of effectiveness of the oral hearing as a right of defense is highlighted by the fact that 
many affected parties decline the option to attend a formal  oral  hearing.  Instead, Microsoft submits that 
given the significant cost associated with market investigations, the Commission should take the opportunity 
to strengthen the oral hearing procedure, which could instead be used at an earlier stage to decide whether 
or not to open a Phase II investigation, involving key decision makers at that point in the process. 

27  See Competition Commission, Guidelines for market investigations: Their role, procedures, assessment, and 

remedies, 2013, para. 22. The original text has been retained unamended by the CMA board. 

28  For discussion of this point, see P. Marsden, Checks and balances: EU competition law and the rule of law, 22 

Loy. Consumer Law Review 62, 2009. 

29  OECD, European Commission – Peer Review of Competition Law and Policy, 2005.  

15 

 
 
 
 
 
 
E.2 

Timing safeguard 

Microsoft considers that the legal tests in NCT investigations should be bound by strict deadlines by which 
it  must  conclude  Phase  I  and  Phase  II  of  its  review.  This  follows  the  approach  from  the  UK’s  market 
investigation regime, where the CMA must conclude a market study (de facto Phase I) within 12 months 
and must then conclude any market investigation (de facto Phase II) within 18 months from the date that 
the reference is made (extendable by six months exceptionally). 

Given the potentially burdensome nature of an investigation (particularly where the firms are not alleged to 
have infringed competition law), it is important that Commission’s powers of investigation  under the NCT 
do not result in drawn-out investigations (with their deleterious effects on the businesses under scrutiny). A 
time-limit will also help to ensure a focused nature to the investigation, ensuring that potential remedies are 
considered (and market tested) at an early stage, promoting efficient use of public and private resources. 
Moreover, in addition to avoiding the additional procedural costs of lengthy investigations, a time-limit on 
the  market  investigation also has the  benefit of supporting the rationales that the NCT should allow the 
Commission to intervene before consumer harm has occurred (or worsened).   

Microsoft believes that there are two important elements to ensure that timing safeguards have the desired 
effect on the NCT process.  

Firstly, Microsoft submits that the NCT should impose a general time limit for the conclusion of a Phase I 
investigation (and the decision whether to open a Phase II investigation), as well as a final deadline for the 
conclusion  of  Phase  II  investigations  by  which  point  the  substantive  findings  must  be  made  and  the 
remedies  (if  any)  imposed.  This  approach  would  be  broadly  in  line  with  the  UK’s  market  investigation 
regime. The Commission may also consider shorter timelines for remedies that are recommendations to 
governments/public  bodies  and  longer  timelines  for  actual  orders  to  undertakings  (given  the  need  for 
additional scrutiny).  

Secondly, the Microsoft submits that the NCT must have appropriate safeguards to prevent circumvention 
of the timing safeguard. In particular, as outlined above, unless it is integrated into the time limits as “Phase 
I” of the NCT process, the Commission should not be able to use a sector inquiry to de facto conduct a pre-
NCT  investigation.  Equally,  the  Commission  should  not  be  able  to  abandon  an  NCT  investigation  and 
restarting  anew to circumvent the time limits. As such, opening a new NCT investigation  must therefore 
create a time-bar on the opening of another NCT investigation addressing the same issue or market. Finally, 
unlike merger cases, the parties affected by the investigation are unlikely to have incentives aligned to have 
the investigation concluded in a timely manner. Without a strict time limit on the Commission’s side, and 
incentives for market participants to respond to information requests in a timely manner, NCT investigations 
are likely to incur significant delays which would undermine the effectiveness of the tool.  

F. 

Judicial review safeguard 

The final safeguard, and perhaps one of the most important for the legitimacy of the NCT, relates to  the 
rights  of  affected  firms  to  challenge  the  Commission’s  findings  (and  remedies)  before  the  EU  Courts. 
Microsoft draws attention to two important aspects of the right to judicial review. 

F.1 

Clear judiciable tests tailored to the remedy imposed 

Firstly, Microsoft submits that the substantive legal tests for the NCT must be sufficiently clear and precise 
to enable affected companies to challenge the Commission’s findings. To adequately safeguard the rights 
of  defense,  this  must  allow  affected  firms  to  challenge  not  just  the  Commission’s  findings  of  structural 

16 

 
 
 
 
 
competition problems, but also to challenge the suitability and the proportionality of the imposed remedies. 
This means that the appropriate legal test for the imposition of remedies should be linked to the nature of 
the remedy (e.g. different standards for structural versus behavioral remedies). Otherwise, the Commission 
would have free reign to impose any remedy it desires once it establishes a structural competition problem. 
Microsoft therefore submits that separate, judiciable tests for remedies of different nature will be necessary 
for the EU Courts to safeguard the rights of defense and represent an effective check on the Commission’s 
power.  

F.2 

Intensity of judicial review 

Secondly, Microsoft submits that the scope and intensity of judicial review of the EU courts should be the 
same as for antitrust and merger control decisions.  

Aside from unlimited jurisdiction on fines, the judicial review of the legality of competition decisions is limited 
in scope, as the General Court is not entitled to substitute in its own judgment for that of the Commission. 
However, the intensity and thoroughness of this legality review requires the General Court to scrutinize in 
painstaking  detail  the  robustness  of  the  Commission’s  conclusions.  This  has  been  demonstrated  on  a 
number of occasions, most recently in CK Telecoms UK v Commission, where the General Court annulled 
the  Commission’s  decision  to  prohibit  the  merger  between  Three  and  O2  in  the  UK,  finding  that  the 
Commission’s theories of harm were too vague did not demonstrate a “strong probability” of the existence 
of significant impediments to effective competition.30  

Microsoft submits that the NCT should be subject to the same high intensity of judicial review as for other 
competition decisions, regardless of whether the NCT does not provide for  fines or infringements. It has 
been consistently held in this regard, in both merger31 and antitrust32 cases, that the Commission’s margin 
of appreciation in economic matters should be limited by the Court to ensure that “the evidence put forward 
is factually accurate, reliable and consistent but must also determine whether that evidence contains all the 
relevant  data  that  must  be  taken  into  consideration  in  appraising  a  complex  situation  and  whether  it  is 
capable of substantiating the conclusions drawn from it”. Indeed, the intensity of the General Court’s review 
of the legality of Commission decisions does not notably vary between  quasi-criminal antitrust decisions 
and merger decisions (which similar to the NCT, have no fines or infringements attached).33   

Moreover, it would be harmful to afford the Commission a greater level of discretion in NCT investigations 
than it has in respect of other areas of competition law. Firstly, given the broad scope of (Option 3) of the 
NCT, and more importantly its broad remedial powers, it would be counterintuitive to have less scrutiny of 
Commission decisions given the significant potential impact on private interests. Secondly,  more intense 
scrutiny  of  the  Commission’s  decisions  helps  rather  than  weakens  enforcement,  as  it  encourages  rigor 
within the decision-making process and helps to sharpen its own internal decision-making process. In the 
context of the NCT, which would create new administrative powers and where there is no clear precedent 
to draw on, the Courts must have an active role in shaping the boundaries in order to ensure a consistent 

30  Case T‑399/16, CK Telecoms UK Investments Ltd v European Commission, ECLI:EU: T:2020:217, para. 118.  
31  Case C‑12/03 P, Commission v Tetra Laval, EU :C:2005:87, 2005, para. 39 ; Case T‑399/16, CK Telecoms UK 

Investments Ltd v European Commission, ECLI:EU:T:2020:217, 2020, para. 76. 
32  Case T-201/04 Microsoft Corp. v Commission, ECR II-3601, 2007, paras. 87-89.  
33  Some have even argued that, in light of judgments in Airtours, Tetra Laval, and Schneider Electric, that the EU 
Courts have been more prepared to comprehensively review the economic analysis in merger cases than in 
antitrust cases. See Ian Forrester, A Bush in Need of Pruning: The Luxuriant Growth of Light Judicial Review, 
European University Institute, Robert Schuman Centre for Advanced Studies, EU Competition Law and Policy 
Workshop/Proceedings, 2009, p. 28. 

17 

 
 
 
 
 
 
application of EU law. In this regard, the NCT should avoid following the approach under the UK market 
investigation  regime,  where  the  limited  intensity  of  judicial  review  has  resulted  in  few  substantive 
challenges, having limiting effects on legal certainty and resulting in a lack of balance.  

31 August 2020 

18 

 
 
 
 
 
  
  
