Instrat and European Horizons’ joint contribution to the 
EU consultations on the New Competition Tool (NCT) 

Instrat  and  European  Horizons  appreciate  the  opportunity  to  comment  on  the  European 
Commission’s Inception Impact Assessment regarding the development of a New Competition 
Tool (NCT).  

Instrat is a progressive think-tank focused on public policy advisory. We provide research and 
consult on digital economy, energy and environment, sustainable finance, labour market and 
inequalities.  We  act  in  the  public interest, in  our work  we  create  and  adapt  open  access  & 
open source tools.  

European Horizons is a global, student-led policy incubator committed to giving young people 
a voice in shaping the future of Europe and transatlantic relations. Through our network of 
university chapters across the world, and in collaboration with partner organizations, European 
Horizons  devises,  tests,  and  advocates  for  innovative  policy  ideas  to  advance  European 
integration. 

Executive Summary: New Competition Tool 

●  Based on our argumentation below, we believe that the European Commission should 
be empowered through the New Competition Tool to effectively address the structural 
risk for competition (a tipping market) as well as the structural lack of competition (a 
failing market) in a regulatory capacity. 

●  The  New  Competition  Tool  should  allow  the  European  Commission  to  impose 
behavioral, and where necessary, structural remedies in order to prevent digital service 
providers  from  becoming  gatekeepers,  ex ante.  Therefore,  we  recommend  a  market 
structure-based competition tool, as it — unlike a dominance-based tool — would not 
be limited to companies which have already acquired market dominance. 

●  Online platforms oftentimes leverage network effects and strong positions in one area 
of the digital economy to aggressively scale up new digital and non-digital services in 
adjacent markets such as advertising, financial services, housing, and cloud computing. 
Therefore, we recommend that the European Commission implement an NCT which is 
applicable  across sectors  and  prohibits companies  from  exploiting  conglomerate  and 

Instrat Foundation: jan.zygmuntowski@instrat.pl 
www.instrat.pl 

European Horizons: philipp.rombach@europeanhorizons.org 
www.europeanhorizons.org 

Document dated 8.09.2020  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
network effects. To achieve this, a competition tool with limited scope will not suffice. 
Instead, we recommend choosing a tool applying a horizontal scope. 

●  Consequently, Instrat and European Horizons strongly recommend implementing Option 

3: a market structure-based competition tool with a horizontal scope. 

Introduction 

The European Digital Strategy is presently foremost, after the European Green Deal, on the 
European Commission’s policy agenda for a more integrated Europe. ICT has become a general 
purpose technology, affecting all sectors of the economy and also, fundamentally, the fabric 
of our societies. The growing divide between slow moving legislative and regulatory bodies and 
fast-paced technological innovation, combined with disruptive business models of the digital 
economy  have  created  an  amalgamation  of  complex  and  interdependent  problems.  In  the 
context  of  this  consultation  document  we  will  restrict  ourselves  to  only  mention  the  main 
issues related to competition and market structure. 

●  Online platforms act as gatekeepers and leverage an environment which allows for the 
monopolization of markets and thus an increasingly uneven playing field. This results in 
reduced  social  gains  due  to  a  sharp  drop  in  research  and  development  spendings, 
decreasing  innovation and start-up competition.  

●  There is a lack of flexibility and applicability of existing competition laws and proper 
legal  enforcement  mechanisms  in  the  digital  economy  on  both  the  European  and 
national level.  

To  support  the  existing  European  Digital  Strategy,  the  above  mentioned  problems  must  be 
addressed through policy solutions and regulatory measures that will facilitate socially and 
economically beneficial development, both in the common internet and for the broader digital 
economy, all while deepening European integration. The European Single Market has helped 
transform the European continent into a global, economic heavyweight. Therefore, when the 
European  Commission  implements  new  regulations  to  counter  tipping  markets  and  market 
failures caused by oligopolistic and monopolistic multinational corporations, it must do so in 
a fair, robust, and intelligent manner. Only then can we hope to again witness the so-called 
Brussels effect: causing the world to follow where the European Commission leads.  

General remarks on the NCT 

Not only has the evolution of the digital economy brought many benefits to consumers and 
entrepreneurs, but it has also made the digital economy a key driver for economic growth and 
productivity. Nevertheless, we observe that power in the digital market is concentrated in the 

Instrat Foundation: jan.zygmuntowski@instrat.pl 
www.instrat.pl 

European Horizons: philipp.rombach@europeanhorizons.org 
www.europeanhorizons.org 

Document dated 8.09.2020  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
hands of a minimal number of big players, due to unrealistically high barriers to market-entry. 
Online platforms increasingly act as gatekeepers. Markets dominated by gatekeeping platforms 
are characterised by 

●  extreme economies of scale and scope, 
●  strong network effects, 
●  zero pricing and data dependency,  
●  a swift blow to market competition, and 
●  a winner-takes-most reality.  

Applying these five characteristics to any of the big tech companies already demonstrates the 
urgent need for a bold and dedicated change in policy.  

The  current  legal  framework  is  no  longer  adequate  and  leaves  open  opportunities  for  the 
violation of competition rules by companies dominant in digital markets. Therefore, it is vital 
to  create  a  tool  that  complements  the  existing  competition  legislation  and  addresses  the 
structural risk for competition (a market tips in favor of one dominant player) as well as the 
structural lack of competition (a market fails).  

NCT legal basis  

Relationship with Articles 101 and 102 TFEU 

As was stated in the Inception Impact Assessment, the aim of the New Competition Tool is to 
resolve certain structural competition problems that are not addressed (e.g. monopolisation 
strategies by non-dominant companies with market power), or that cannot be addressed in 
the  most  effective  manner  (e.g.  parallel  leveraging  strategies  by  dominant  companies  into 
multiple adjacent markets) by Articles 101 and 102 TFEU. As the idea of complementing the 
current framework is reasonable, one must bear in mind that introducing the NCT may lead to 
certain overlaps between the newly introduced tool and currently existing provisions. To avoid 
legal uncertainty in the new legislation, the European Commission should carefully scrutinize 
the relationship between Articles 101 and 102 TFEU and the NCT. 

Basis of EU intervention  

Another concern is related to the legal basis of implementing the NCT. The Inception Impact 
Assessment indicates Article 103 TFEU in combination with Article 114 TFEU as a ground for 
the European Commission’s intervention. However, the Article 103 TFEU clearly states that its 
aim is to enforce  Articles 101 and 102 TFEU, while the goal of the NCT is to enable the European 
Commission to act without prior finding of any infringement of above-mentioned articles. The 
European  Commission  should  therefore  consider  providing  a  more  suitable  legal  basis  to 
ensure effective enforcement of the NCT. This could be achieved by relying on the so-called 
flexibility clause described in Article 352 TFEU.  

Instrat Foundation: jan.zygmuntowski@instrat.pl 
www.instrat.pl 

European Horizons: philipp.rombach@europeanhorizons.org 
www.europeanhorizons.org 

Document dated 8.09.2020  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Legality test 

The proposed NCT aims to tackle issues related to a structural risk for competition as well as 
issues  resulting  from  a  structural  lack  of  competition.  However,  the  Inception  Impact 
Assessment does not precisely specify the requirements that need to be fulfilled to consider 
certain issues as structural competition problems. To ensure legal certainty and compliance 
with the rule of law, it is essential to introduce a test to determine whether there is a genuine 
need to apply the NCT. To avoid ambiguities in interpretation, the European Commission should 
establish  clear  guidelines  and  specify  what  precisely  constitutes  ‘a  structural  risk  for 
competition’  and  ‘a  structural  lack  of  competition.’  Without  implementing  such  a  test,  the 
European  Commission  risks  precipitating  infringements  and  misuses  of  European  law  by 
bypassing standards provided by Articles 101 and 102 TFEU. 

Recommendations for the NCT 

Horizontal or limited scope of application  

Online platforms such as Facebook and Google with its parent company Alphabet are fast-
evolving  enterprises  that  quickly  adapt  to  different  market  conditions  and  the  changing 
demands of consumers. Their ability to create and shape new business models based on the 
collection and processing of vast quantities of data allows them to rapidly expand in adjacent 
markets  owing  to  complementarities  inherent  in  the  use  of  personal  data,  such  as  online 
advertising, telecommunication, or financial markets. The multidimensional nature of  online 
platform activities combined with the growing popularity of digital services means that large 
technology  firms  often  exert  influence  beyond  areas  strictly  associated  with  the  digital 
environment. As was noted by the European Commission in the Inception Impact Assessment, 
the  line  between  digital  and  non-digital  markets  is  increasingly  blurred.  A  good  example  of 
how  far-reaching  this  influence  on  non-digitally  enabled  markets  can  be  is  Airbnb  and  the 
issues related to its business model. While the platform is presenting itself as an intermediary 
between those who want to rent out space and those who are looking for space to rent, it has 
fundamentally  changed  the  market  structure  of  the  accommodation  industry  by  distorting 
competition in the hospitality sector. 

Taking the above into account, we consider that relying on a tool limited only to certain digital 
or  digitally-enabled markets  would  not suffice  in  overcoming current competition concerns 
related to the digital economy. Hence, we conclude that it is preferable to adopt an instrument 
with a horizontal scope. 

Instrat Foundation: jan.zygmuntowski@instrat.pl 
www.instrat.pl 

European Horizons: philipp.rombach@europeanhorizons.org 
www.europeanhorizons.org 

Document dated 8.09.2020  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Market structure-based or dominance-based competition tool 

We  strongly  recommend  the  European  Commission  to  introduce  a  market  structure-based 
competition  tool  to  overcome  the  shortcomings  of  a  purely  dominance-based  tool. 
Implementing  such  a  dominance-based  tool  would  fundamentally  undermine  the  NCT’s 
mission  of  preventing the creation of powerful market players with an entrenched market 
and/or gatekeeper position, ex  ante,  as  it  would  only  be  limited  to  online  platforms  which 
already  have  acquired  market  dominance.  Additionally,  a  dominance-based  tool  would  risk 
creating  legislative  redundancies  in  conjunction  with  Article  102  TFEU.  Although  the 
dominance-based  NCT  would  allow  the  European  Commission  to  address  competition 
concerns  without  infringements  on  a  dominant  market  position,  the  potential  regulatory 
outcomes  of  a  dominance-based  NCT  would  not  substantially  differ  from  those  reached 
through the existing legal framework. 

The past has shown that competition investigations resulting in structural remedies of already 
dominant  companies  are  often  nothing  more  than  a  cost  of  doing  business.  Following  long 
investigation processes, the European Union fined Google/Alphabet on the grounds of abuse 
of market power on three separate occasions. The fines amounted to a total of €8.2bn — a 
sum paling in comparison to Alphabet’s annual profits of approximately €30bn. 

Large online platforms are known for their ability to create entire ecosystems consisting of 
many  actors  functioning  in  various, separate  sectors.  In  the  most  far-reaching  cases, these 
ecosystems comprise operating systems, browser and other software, search engines, identity 
verification, e-commerce, e-mailing, maps, online ads, cloud computing, et cetera. There are 
even  plans  to  add  healthcare,  autonomous  vehicles,  and  satellite  systems  to  such  ever-
growing  tech  conglomerates.  These  players  are  often  vertically  integrated  and  align  their 
behaviour in a way that causes problems not necessarily related to their dominance. Namely, 
even if a company does not dominate in a specific market, its simultaneous presence in several 
interconnected markets can be detrimental to other independent market participants. Since 
smaller  players  may  be  subsidized  by  incomes  obtained  from  other  vertically  integrated 
companies, they are able to maintain the highest standard of services and the broadest scope 
in  their  offerings.  Consequently,  even  without  apparent  dominance,  certain  companies  are 
capable of preventing competitors from entering in or emerging from a market. Equipped with 
deep  financial  pockets  resulting  from  immense  profits  of  their  power  houses  (Google  for 
Alphabet, Amazon Web Services for Amazon), buying up emerging competition is widespread. 
In the last decade alone, the five biggest tech companies acquired more than 400 start-ups 
all while facing only limited scrutiny by competition regulators.  

The NCT should therefore address all structural competition concerns ex ante, and ought to 
include markets in which the respective company is not yet dominant but is likely to abuse 
competition  nonetheless,  eg.  by  creating  oligopolistic  market  structures.  Therefore,  we 

Instrat Foundation: jan.zygmuntowski@instrat.pl 
www.instrat.pl 

European Horizons: philipp.rombach@europeanhorizons.org 
www.europeanhorizons.org 

Document dated 8.09.2020  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
recommend the European Commission to pursue a holistic approach by introducing a market 
structure-based competition tool. 

Execution of the NCT 

To  ensure  the  effectiveness  of  the  NCT,  it  is  essential  to  designate  a  new  regulatory  body 
responsible  for  detecting  and  eliminating  infringements  caused  by  digital  platforms.  As  we 
observe,  competition  problems  resulting  from  the  growth  of  platform  economies  are 
substantially  complex,  and  may  be  too  problematic  to  be  sufficiently  tackled  by  existing 
regulators. Therefore, to take full advantage of the NCT, the European Commission, as well as 
the Member States, ought to consider introducing a regulatory body which will be designated 
to  exercise  tasks  related  strictly  to  digital  markets  (e.g.  screening  the  digital  market, 
monitoring platform behaviors, requesting non-personal data information).  

The European Commission as well as Europe’s citizens are right to view concentrated markets 
and lack of competition with suspicion. At the same time we acknowledge the risk of arbitrary 
decision-making by an all too powerful and unaccountable regulatory body.  

Recommendation  

On the basis of the Inception Impact Assessment and consultation documents, we strongly 
recommend that the  European  Commission  implement  Option  3:  a market structure-based 
competition tool with a horizontal scope.  

We believe that the option addresses current competition concerns in the most comprehensive 
way, and allows regulators to take full advantage of ex ante instruments. However, we also 
urge the European Commission to take a closer look into possible overlaps of the NCT with 
the current competition law framework. Therefore, we recommend the European Commission 
to take the precautions necessary (e.g. to open further consultations on developing specific 
instruments) to avoid  potential gaps and legal uncertainty. 

Creating European champions has become a buzzword lately, not just in Brussels. However, 
we want to stress the importance that it should not be the goal of this New Competition Tool 
to artificially create our very own European Googles, Facebooks, and Amazons. The resulting 
issues would be as problematic and worrying as the ones we see today. As long as companies 
play by European rules it should not bother us whether they are based in the United States, 
in Europe or in Asia. Instead the goal must be to craft rules for a digital environment which 
allows for a plethora of companies, and thus ideas, to thrive without facing a tipping or failed 
market. We at Instrat and European Horizons strive for an internet that is not just of and by 
the people, but for the people.  

Instrat Foundation: jan.zygmuntowski@instrat.pl 
www.instrat.pl 

European Horizons: philipp.rombach@europeanhorizons.org 
www.europeanhorizons.org 

Document dated 8.09.2020  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
